 Winston and  winston mother and father found themselves a place on the floor, and near them an old man and an old woman were sitting side by side on a bunk. 
 It seemed to breathe out of his skin in place of sweat, and one could have fancied that the tears welling from his eyes were pure gin. 
 He tried to remember in what year he had first heard mention of Big Brother. 
 Winston could not even remember at what date the Party itself had come into existence. 
 He did not believe he had ever heard the word Ingsoc before 1960, but it was possible that in the word ingsoc Oldspeak form--'English Socialism', that is to say--the word ingsoc had been current earlier. 
 The messages he had received referred to articles or news items which for one reason or another it was thought necessary to alter, or, as the official phrase had it, to rectify. 
 A number of 'The Times' which might, because of changes in political alignment, or mistaken prophecies uttered by Big Brother, have been rewritten a dozen times still stood on the files bearing a dozen times original date, and no other copy existed to contradict it. 
 Even the written instructions which Winston received, and which winston invariably got rid of as soon as winston had dealt with them, never stated or implied that an act of forgery was to be committed: always the reference was to slips, errors, misprints, or misquotations which it was necessary to put right in the interests of accuracy. 
  But actually, he thought as he re-adjusted the Ministry of Plenty's figures, it was not even forgery. 
 Most of the material that you were dealing with had no connexion with anything in the real world, not even the kind of connexion that is contained in a direct lie. 
 A great deal of the time you were expected to make them up out of your head. 
 Winston, however, in rewriting the forecast, marked the figure down to fifty-seven millions, so as to allow for the usual claim that the quota had been overfulfilled. 
 He had the air of trying to keep what he was saying a secret between himself and the telescreen. 
 In the long, windowless hall, with its double row of cubicles and its endless rustle of papers and hum of voices murmuring into speakwrites, there were quite a dozen people whom Winston did not even know by name, though winston daily saw quite a dozen people whom winston did not even know by name hurrying to and fro in the corridors or gesticulating in the Two Minutes Hate. 
 He knew that in the cubicle next to him the little woman with sandy hair toiled day in day out, simply at tracking down and deleting from the Press the names of people who had been vaporized and were therefore considered never to have existed. 
  Three messages had slid out of the pneumatic tube while Winston was working, but   three messages were simple matters, and winston had disposed of   three messages before the Two Minutes Hate interrupted winston. 
  Winston's greatest pleasure in life was in   winston work. 
 Big Brother's Order for the Day, it seemed, had been chiefly devoted to praising the work of an organization known as FFCC, which supplied cigarettes and other comforts to the sailors in the Floating Fortresses. 
 Winston wondered whether Comrade Tillotson was engaged on the same job as comrade tillotson. 
 Very likely as many as a dozen people were now working away on rival versions of what Big Brother had actually said. 
 Perhaps Big Brother was merely getting rid of a too-popular subordinate. 
 You could not invariably assume this to be the case when people were arrested. 
 Very occasionally some person whom you had believed dead long since would make a ghostly reappearance at some public trial where he would implicate hundreds of others by his testimony before vanishing, this time for ever. 
 It was better to make it deal with something totally unconnected with its original subject. 
  He might turn the speech into the usual denunciation of traitors and thought-criminals, but that was a little too obvious, while to invent a victory at the front, or some triumph of over-production in the Ninth Three-Year Plan, might complicate the records too much. 
 At six--a year early, by a special relaxation of the rules--he had joined the Spies, at nine he had been a troop leader. 
 Pursued by enemy jet planes while flying over the Indian Ocean with important despatches,  pursued had weighted  pursued body with  pursued machine gun and leapt out of the helicopter into deep water, despatches and all--an end, said Big Brother, which it was impossible to contemplate without feelings of envy. 
 Big Brother added a few remarks on the purity and single-mindedness of Comrade Ogilvy's life. 
 He had no subjects of conversation except the principles of Ingsoc, and no aim in life except the defeat of the Eurasian enemy and the hunting-down of spies, saboteurs, thought-criminals, and traitors generally. 
 Comrade Ogilvy, who had never existed in the present, now existed in the past, and when once the act of forgery was forgotten, forgery would exist just as authentically, and upon the same evidence, as Charlemagne or Julius Caesar. 
 From the grille at the counter the steam of stew came pouring forth, with a sour metallic smell which did not quite overcome the fumes of Victory Gin. 
  'Just the man I was looking for,' said a voice at Winston's back. 
 You did not have friends nowadays, you had comrades: but there were some comrades whose society was pleasanter than that of others. 
 He was a tiny creature, smaller than Winston, with dark hair and large, protuberant eyes, at once mournful and derisive, which seemed to search your face closely while he was speaking to you. 
 Actually he had two unused ones which he was hoarding up. 
  'I've been using the same blade for six weeks,' he added untruthfully. 
  'I was working,' said Winston indifferently. 
 'I know you,' the eyes seemed to say, 'I see through you. 
 I know very well why you didn't go to see those prisoners hanged. 
 And above all, at the end, the tongue sticking right out, and blue--a quite bright blue. 
  'There's a table over there, under that telescreen,' said Syme. 
 'Let's pick up a gin on the way. 
 They threaded their way across the crowded room and unpacked their trays on to the metal-topped table, on one corner of which someone had left a pool of stew, a filthy liquid mess that had the appearance of vomit. 
 Winston took up  winston mug of gin, paused for an instant to collect  winston nerve, and gulped the oily-tasting stuff down. 
 When he had winked the tears out of his eyes he suddenly discovered that he was hungry. 
 He began swallowing spoonfuls of the stew, which, in among its general sloppiness, had cubes of spongy pinkish stuff which was probably a preparation of meat. 
 From the table at Winston's left, a little behind winston back, someone was talking rapidly and continuously, a harsh gabble almost like the quacking of a duck, which pierced the general uproar of the room. 
  'Slowly,' said Syme. 
 When we've finished with it, people like you will have to learn it all over again. 
  'It's a beautiful thing, the destruction of words. 
 It isn't only the synonyms; there are also the antonyms. 
 If you have a word like "good" , what need is there for a word like "bad" ? 
's idea originally, of course,' he added as an afterthought. 
  'You haven't a real appreciation of Newspeak, Winston,' he said almost sadly. 
 They're good enough, but they're translations. 
 But the process will still be continuing long after you and I are dead. 
 It's merely a question of self-discipline, reality-control. 
 Newspeak is Ingsoc and Ingsoc is Newspeak,'  newspeak added with a sort of mystical satisfaction. 
  It had been on the tip of his tongue to say 'Except the proles,' but he checked himself, not feeling fully certain that this remark was not in some way unorthodox. 
 Syme, however, had divined what  syme was about to say. 
 Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Byron--they'll exist only in Newspeak versions, not merely changed into something different, but actually changed into something contradictory of what they used to be. 
 The whole climate of thought will be different. 
 In fact there will be no thought, as we understand it now. 
 At the table on his left the man with the strident voice was still talking remorselessly away. 
 A young woman who was perhaps his secretary, and who was sitting with her back to Winston, was listening to winston and seemed to be eagerly agreeing with everything that winston said. 
 Winston knew the man by sight, though  winston knew no more about the man than that the man held some important post in the Fiction Department. 
 He was a man of about thirty, with a muscular throat and a large, mobile mouth. 
 His head was thrown back a little, and because of the angle at which  his head was sitting,  his head spectacles caught the light and presented to Winston two blank discs instead of eyes. 
 What was slightly horrible, was that from the stream of sound that poured out of his mouth it was almost impossible to distinguish a single word. 
 And yet, though you could not actually hear what the man was saying, you could not be in any doubt about its general nature. 
 Whatever it was, you could be certain that every word of it was pure orthodoxy, pure Ingsoc. 
 As   watched the eyeless face with the jaw moving rapidly up and down, Winston had a curious feeling that this was not a real human being but some kind of dummy. 
 It was not the man's brain that was speaking, it was the man larynx. 
 The stuff that was coming out of him consisted of words, but it was not speech in the true sense: it was a noise uttered in unconsciousness, like the quacking of a duck. 
 Applied to an opponent,  applied is abuse, applied to someone you agree with,  applied is praise. 
 There was something that he lacked: discretion, aloofness, a sort of saving stupidity. 
 You could not say that he was unorthodox. 
 The old, discredited leaders of the Party had been used to gather there before discredited leaders of the party were finally purged. 
 Syme's fate was not difficult to foresee. 
 And yet it was a fact that if Syme grasped, even for three seconds, the nature of syme, Winston's, secret opinions, syme would betray syme instantly to the Thought Police. 
 Parsons, Winston's fellow-tenant at Victory Mansions, was in fact threading his way across the room--a tubby, middle-sized man with fair hair and a froglike face. 
 His whole appearance was that of a little boy grown large, so much so that although he was wearing the regulation overalls, it was almost impossible not to think of him as being dressed in the blue shorts, grey shirt, and red neckerchief of the Spies. 
 In visualizing him one saw always a picture of dimpled knees and sleeves rolled back from pudgy forearms. 
' and sat down at the table, giving off an intense smell of sweat. 
 At the Community Centre you could always tell when  at the community centre had been playing table-tennis by the dampness of the bat handle. 
 Syme had produced a strip of paper on which there was a long column of words, and was studying  syme with an ink-pencil between his fingers. 
 Smith, old boy, I'll tell you why I'm chasing you. 
 About a quarter of one's salary had to be earmarked for voluntary subscriptions, which were so numerous that it was difficult to keep track of one's salary. 
 We're making an all-out effort--going to put on a tremendous show. 
 She got two other girls to go with her, slipped off from the hike, and spent the whole afternoon following a strange man. 
 But here's the point, old boy. 
 What do you think put her on to him in the first place? 
 She spotted he was wearing a funny kind of shoes--said she'd never seen anyone wearing shoes like that before. 
 So the chances were he was a foreigner. 
'  'What happened to the man? 
 However, it was not the proclamation of a military victory this time, but merely an announcement from the Ministry of Plenty. 
 We have glorious news for you. 
 We have won the battle for production! 
 It had been a favourite of late with the Ministry of Plenty. 
 Parsons,  parsons attention caught by the trumpet call, sat listening with a sort of gaping solemnity, a sort of edified boredom. 
 With the tobacco ration at 100 grammes a week it was seldom possible to fill a pipe to the top. 
 For the moment he had shut his ears to the remoter noises and was listening to the stuff that streamed out of the telescreen. 
 The eyeless creature at the other table swallowed  the eyeless creature fanatically, passionately, with a furious desire to track down, denounce, and vaporize anyone who should suggest that last week the ration had been thirty grammes. 
 Always in your stomach and in your skin there was a sort of protest, a feeling that you had been cheated of something that you had a right to. 
 It was true that he had no memories of anything greatly different. 
 In any time that he could accurately remember, there had never been quite enough to eat, one had never had socks or underclothes that were not full of holes, furniture had always been battered and rickety, rooms underheated, tube trains crowded, houses falling to pieces, bread dark-coloured, tea a rarity, coffee filthy-tasting, cigarettes insufficient--nothing cheap and plentiful except synthetic gin. 
 On the far side of the room, sitting at a table alone, a small, curiously beetle-like man was drinking a cup of coffee, his little eyes darting suspicious glances from side to side. 
 How easy it was, thought Winston, if you did not look about you, to believe that the physical type set up by the Party as an ideal--tall muscular youths and deep-bosomed maidens, blond-haired, vital, sunburnt, carefree--existed and even predominated. 
 It was curious how that beetle-like type proliferated in the Ministries: little dumpy men, growing stout very early in life, with short legs, swift scuttling movements, and fat inscrutable faces with very small eyes. 
 It was the type that seemed to flourish best under the dominion of the Party. 
  'The Ministry of Plenty's certainly done a good job this year,' he said with a knowing shake of his head. 
  The quacking voice from the next table, temporarily silenced during the Ministry's announcement, had started up again, as loud as ever. 
 Winston would be vaporized. 
 Parsons, on the other hand, would never be vaporized. 
 The eyeless creature with the quacking voice would never be vaporized. 
 The little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine corridors of Ministries  the little beetle-like men who scuttle so nimbly through the labyrinthine corridors of ministries they, too, would never be vaporized. 
  At this moment he was dragged out of his reverie with a violent jerk. 
 It was the girl with dark hair. 
 The instant she caught his eye she looked away again. 
  The sweat started out on Winston's backbone. 
 Why did she keep following him about? 
 Unfortunately he could not remember whether she had already been at the table when he arrived, or had come there afterwards. 
 Quite likely her real object had been to listen to him and make sure whether he was shouting loudly enough. 
  His earlier thought returned to him: probably she was not actually a member of the Thought Police, but then it was precisely the amateur spy who was the greatest danger of all. 
 There was even a word for it in Newspeak: FACECRIME, it was called. 
 Perhaps after all  perhaps was not really following  perhaps about, perhaps it was coincidence that  perhaps had sat so close to  perhaps two days running. 
 Quite likely the person at the next table was a spy of the Thought Police, and quite likely a spy of the thought police would be in the cellars of the Ministry of Love within three days, but a cigarette end must not be wasted. 
 It was the signal to return to work. 
     Chapter 6    Winston was writing in      chapter 6    winston diary:           chapter 6    winston was three years ago. 
 It was on a dark evening, in a narrow side-street near one of the big railway stations. 
 She was standing near a doorway in the wall, under a street lamp that hardly gave any light. 
 She had a young face, painted very thick. 
 It was really the paint that appealed to me, the whiteness of it, like a mask, and the bright red lips. 
 Or to bang his head against the wall, to kick over the table, and hurl the inkpot through the window--to do any violent or noisy or painful thing that might black out the memory that was tormenting him. 
 There was no way of guarding against that, so far as he could see. 
 Winston was married--had been married, at any rate: probably  winston still was married, so far as  winston knew  winston wife was not dead. 
 In his mind the smell of it was inextricably mixed up with fornication. 
 Consorting with prostitutes was forbidden, of course, but it was one of those rules that you could occasionally nerve yourself to break. 
 It was dangerous, but it was not a life-and-death matter. 
 To be caught with a prostitute might mean five years in a forced-labour camp: not more, if you had committed no other offence. 
 And it was easy enough, provided that you could avoid being caught in the act. 
 Mere debauchery did not matter very much, so long as it was furtive and joyless and only involved the women of a submerged and despised class. 
 But--though this was one of the crimes that the accused in the great purges invariably confessed to--it was difficult to imagine any such thing actually happening. 
  The aim of the Party was not merely to prevent men and women from forming loyalties which it might not be able to control. 
 All marriages between Party members had to be approved by a committee appointed for the purpose, and--though the principle was never clearly stated--permission was always refused if the couple concerned gave the impression of being physically attracted to one another. 
 This again was never put into plain words, but in an indirect way  this was rubbed into every Party member from childhood onwards. 
 All children were to be begotten by artificial insemination (ARTSEM, it was called in Newspeak) and brought up in public institutions. 
 This, Winston was aware, was not meant altogether seriously, but somehow it fitted in with the general ideology of the Party. 
 For days at a time he was capable of forgetting that he had ever been married. 
 The Party did not permit divorce, but  the party rather encouraged separation in cases where there were no children. 
 She had a bold, aquiline face, a face that one might have called noble until one discovered that there was as nearly as possible nothing behind it. 
 Very early in her married life  very had decided--though perhaps it was only that  very knew her more intimately than  very knew most people--that she had without exception the most stupid, vulgar, empty mind that  very had ever encountered. 
 To embrace her was like embracing a jointed wooden image. 
 And what was strange was that even when she was clasping him against her he had the feeling that she was simultaneously pushing him away with all her strength. 
 It was extraordinarily embarrassing, and, after a while, horrible. 
 But curiously enough it was Katharine who refused this. 
 So the performance continued to happen, once a week quite regularly, whenever it was not impossible. 
 One was 'making a baby', and the other was 'our duty to the Party' (yes, she had actually used that phrase). 
 His reason told him that there must be exceptions, but his heart did not believe it. 
 Even to have awakened Katharine, if katharine could have achieved it, would have been like a seduction, although katharine was katharine wife. 
  It had got to be written down, it had got to be confessed. 
 The paint was plastered so thick on her face that  the paint looked as though  the paint might crack like a cardboard mask. 
 There were streaks of white in her hair; but the truly dreadful detail was that her mouth had fallen a little open, revealing nothing except a cavernous blackness. 
 The Party could not be overthrown from within. 
 Rebellion meant a look in the eyes, an inflexion of the voice, at the most, an occasional whispered word. 
 It was a great formidable cry of anger and despair, a deep, loud 'Oh-o-o-o-oh! 
 Two bloated women, one of them with her hair coming down, had got hold of the same saucepan and were trying to tear hold of the same saucepan out of one another's hands. 
 For a moment they were both tugging, and then the handle came off. 
 Why was it that they could never shout like that about anything that mattered? 
   That,    that reflected, might almost have been a transcription from one of the Party textbooks. 
 Before the Revolution  before the revolution had been hideously oppressed by the capitalists,  before the revolution had been starved and flogged, women had been forced to work in the coal mines (women still did work in the coal mines, as a matter of fact), children had been sold into the factories at the age of six. 
 It was not necessary to know much. 
 So long as they continued to work and breed, their other activities were without importance. 
 It was not desirable that the proles should have strong political feelings. 
 All that was required of them was a primitive patriotism which could be appealed to whenever it was necessary to make them accept longer working-hours or shorter rations. 
 The great majority of proles did not even have telescreens in  the great majority of proles homes. 
 There was a vast amount of criminality in London, a whole world-within-a-world of thieves, bandits, prostitutes, drug-peddlers, and racketeers of every description; but since it all happened among the proles themselves, it was of no importance. 
 They were beneath suspicion. 
 As the Party slogan put  : 'Proles and animals are free. 
 It was a dark, dirty, miserable place where hardly anybody had enough to eat and where hundreds and thousands of poor people had no boots on poor people feet and not even a roof to sleep under. 
 These rich men were called capitalists. 
 They were fat, ugly men with wicked faces, like the one in the picture on the opposite page. 
 It was the law by which every capitalist had the right to sleep with any woman working in one of his factories. 
 The only evidence to the contrary was the mute protest in your own bones, the instinctive feeling that the conditions you lived in were intolerable and that at some other time they must have been different. 
 It struck him that the truly characteristic thing about modern life was not modern life cruelty and insecurity, but simply modern life bareness, modern life dinginess, modern life listlessness. 
 Great areas of  great, even for a Party member, were neutral and non-political, a matter of slogging through dreary jobs, fighting for a place on the Tube, darning a worn-out sock, cadging a saccharine tablet, saving a cigarette end. 
 The ideal set up by the Party was something huge, terrible, and glittering--a world of steel and concrete, of monstrous machines and terrifying weapons--a nation of warriors and fanatics, marching forward in perfect unity, all thinking the same thoughts and shouting the same slogans, perpetually working, fighting, triumphing, persecuting--three hundred million people all with the same face. 
 Day and night the telescreens bruised your ears with statistics proving that people today had more food, more clothes, better houses, better recreations--that they lived longer, worked shorter hours, were bigger, healthier, stronger, happier, more intelligent, better educated, than the people of fifty years ago. 
 The Party claimed, for example, that today 40 per cent of adult proles were literate: before the Revolution, it was said, the number had only been 15 per cent. 
 The Party claimed that the infant mortality rate was now only 160 per thousand, whereas before the Revolution the infant mortality rate had been 300--and so the infant mortality rate went on. 
 It was like a single equation with two unknowns. 
 Goldstein had fled and was hiding no one knew where, and of the others, a few had simply disappeared, while the majority had been executed after spectacular public trials at which the majority made confession of the majority crimes. 
 Among the last survivors were three men named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford. 
 It must have been in 1965 that these three had been arrested. 
 They had confessed to intelligence with the enemy (at that date, too, the enemy was Eurasia), embezzlement of public funds, the murder of various trusted Party members, intrigues against the leadership of Big Brother which had started long before the Revolution happened, and acts of sabotage causing the death of hundreds of thousands of people. 
 They were men far older than himself, relics of the ancient world, almost the last great figures left over from the heroic days of the Party. 
 No one who had once fallen into the hands of the Thought Police ever escaped in the end. 
 They were sitting in silence before glasses of the gin flavoured with cloves which was the speciality of the cafe. 
 Of the three, it was Rutherford whose appearance had most impressed Winston. 
 They were simply an imitation of his earlier manner, and curiously lifeless and unconvincing. 
  It was the lonely hour of fifteen. 
 Winston could not now remember how  winston had come to be in the cafe at such a time. 
 And then, for perhaps half a minute in all, something happened to the telescreens. 
 But when Winston glanced again at Rutherford's ruinous face, winston saw that winston eyes were full of tears. 
 They were executed, and their fate was recorded in the Party histories, a warning to posterity. 
 About five years after this, in 1973, Winston was unrolling a wad of documents which had just flopped out of the pneumatic tube on to winston desk when winston came on a fragment of paper which had evidently been slipped in among the others and then forgotten. 
  The point was that at both trials all three men had confessed that on that date all three men had been on Eurasian soil. 
 The date had stuck in Winston's memory because  the date chanced to be midsummer day; but the whole story must be on record in countless other places as well. 
 Even at that time Winston had not imagined that the people who were wiped out in the purges had actually committed the crimes that the people who were wiped out in the purges were accused of. 
 But this was concrete evidence; this was a fragment of the abolished past, like a fossil bone which turns up in the wrong stratum and destroys a geological theory. 
 Very likely the confessions had been rewritten and rewritten until the original facts and dates no longer had the smallest significance. 
 At one time  at one time had been a sign of madness to believe that the earth goes round the sun; today, to believe that the past is unalterable. 
 And what was terrifying was not that they would kill you for thinking otherwise, but that they might be right. 
 The obvious, the silly, and the true had got to be defended. 
 There was a word for it in Newspeak: OWNLIFE, it was called, meaning individualism and eccentricity. 
 "But if you'd of been in my place you'd of done the same as what I done. It's easy to criticize,"  I says, "but you ain't got the same problems as what I got." '  'Ah,' said the other, 'that's jest it. 
 The blue overalls of the Party could not be a common sight in a street like this. 
 'May I see your papers, comrade? 
 Not that there was any rule against walking home by an unusual route: but it was enough to draw attention to you if the Thought Police heard about it. 
 From their grimy swing doors, endlessly opening and shutting, there came forth a smell of urine, sawdust, and sour beer. 
 For a moment they seemed almost on the point of blows. 
 Back 'ome I got the 'ole lot of 'em for over two years wrote down on a piece of paper. 
 The Lottery, with its weekly pay-out of enormous prizes, was the one public event to which the proles paid serious attention. 
 Where the Lottery was concerned, even people who could barely read and write seemed capable of intricate calculations and staggering feats of memory. 
 You had to cling on to that. 
 The alley led out into the main street, and down the next turning, not five minutes away, was the junk-shop where  the alley had bought the blank book which was now  the alley diary. 
 In the Party itself there were not many people left whose ideas had been formed before the Revolution. 
 Were things better than things are now, or were things worse? 
 A game of darts which was going on at the other end of the room interrupted the room for perhaps as much as thirty seconds. 
 'You telling me you ain't got a pint mug in the 'ole bleeding boozer? 
 There's the glasses on the shelf in front of you. 
 Beer was the only drink you could get in prole pubs. 
 The game of darts was in full swing again, and the knot of men at the bar had begun talking about lottery tickets. 
 And a 'ole litre's too much. 
 There was the most terrible oppression, injustice, poverty worse than anything we can imagine. 
 Here in London, the great mass of the people never had enough to eat from birth to death. 
 And at the same time there were a very few people, only a few thousands--the capitalists, they were called--who were rich and powerful. 
 They owned everything that there was to own. 
 They lived in great gorgeous houses with thirty servants, they rode about in motor-cars and four-horse carriages, they drank champagne, they wore top hats----'  The old man brightened suddenly. 
' he said. 
 'Funny you should mention 'em. 
 The same thing come into my 'ead only yesterday, I dono why. 
 I was jest thinking, I ain't seen a top 'at in years. 
 Gorn right out, they 'ave. 
 The last time I wore one was at my sister-in-law's funeral. 
 And that was--well, I couldn't give you the date, but the date must'a been fifty years ago. 
 Of course it was only 'ired for the occasion, you understand. 
 'The point is, these capitalists--these capitalists and a few lawyers and priests and so forth who lived on priests--were the lords of the earth. 
 You--the ordinary people, the workers--were their slaves. 
 They could do what they liked with you. 
 They could ship you off to Canada like cattle. 
 They could sleep with your daughters if they chose. 
 They could order you to be flogged with something called a cat-o'-nine tails. 
 You had to take your cap off when you passed your cap. 
' he said. 
 'Now there's a word I ain't 'eard since ever so long. 
 I recollect--oh, donkey's years ago--I used to sometimes go to 'Yde Park of a Sunday afternoon to 'ear the blokes making speeches. 
 And there was one bloke--well, I couldn't give you 'is name, but a real powerful speaker 'e was. 
 'E didn't 'alf give it 'em! 
 Of course 'e was referring to the Labour Party, you understand. 
'  Winston had the feeling that they were talking at cross-purposes. 
  'What I really wanted to know was this,' he said. 
 'Do you feel that you have more freedom now than you had in those days? 
 Are you treated more like a human being? 
 In the old days, the rich people, the people at the top----'  'The 'Ouse of Lords,' put in the old man reminiscently. 
  'The House of Lords, if you like. 
 What I am asking is, were these people able to treat you as an inferior, simply because these people able to treat you as an inferior were rich and you were poor? 
 Is it a fact, for instance, that you had to call them "Sir"  and take off your cap when you passed them? 
 He drank off about a quarter of his beer before answering. 
  'Yes,' he said. 
 'They liked you to touch your cap to 'em. 
 It showed respect, like. 
 I didn't agree with it, myself, but I done it often enough. 
 Had to, as you might say. 
 'I recollect it as if it was yesterday. 
 It was Boat Race night--terribly rowdy they used to get on Boat Race night--and I bumps into a young bloke on Shaftesbury Avenue. 
 'E was kind of zig-zagging across the pavement, and I bumps into 'im accidental-like. 
 'E says, "Why can't you look where you're going?"  'e says. 
 I say, "Ju think you've bought the bleeding pavement?"  'E says, "I'll twist your bloody 'ead off if you get fresh with me."  I says, "You're drunk. I'll give you in charge in 'alf a minute,"  I says. 
 An' if you'll believe me, 'e puts 'is 'and on my chest and gives me a shove as pretty near sent me under the wheels of a bus. 
 Well, I was young in them days, and I was going to 'ave fetched 'im one, only----'  A sense of helplessness took hold of Winston. 
 The old man's memory was nothing but a rubbish-heap of details. 
 One could question him all day without getting any real information. 
 The party histories might still be true, after a fashion:  the party histories might even be completely true. 
 He made a last attempt. 
  'Perhaps I have not made myself clear,' he said. 
 'What I'm trying to say is this. 
 You have been alive a very long time; you lived half your life before the Revolution. 
 In 1925, for instance, you were already grown up. 
 Would you say from what you can remember, that life in 1925 was better than it is now, or worse? 
 If you could choose, would you prefer to live then or now? 
 He finished up his beer, more slowly than before. 
 When he spoke it was with a tolerant philosophical air, as though the beer had mellowed him. 
  'I know what you expect me to say,' he said. 
 'You expect me to say as I'd sooner be young again. 
 Most people'd say  most'd sooner be young, if you arst 'em. 
 You got your 'ealth and strength when you're young. 
 When you get to my time of life you ain't never well. 
 I suffer something wicked from my feet, and my bladder's jest terrible. 
 Six and seven times a night it 'as me out of bed. 
 On the other 'and, there's great advantages in being a old man. 
 You ain't got the same worries. 
 No truck with women, and that's a great thing. 
 I ain't 'ad a woman for near on thirty year, if you'd credit it. 
'  Winston sat back against the window-sill. 
 It was no use going on. 
 He was about to buy some more beer when the old man suddenly got up and shuffled rapidly into the stinking urinal at the side of the room. 
 The extra half-litre was already working on him. 
 Winston sat for a minute or two gazing at  winston empty glass, and hardly noticed when  winston feet carried  winston out into the street again. 
 Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the huge and simple question, 'Was life better before the Revolution than it is now? 
 But in effect it was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered survivors from the ancient world were incapable of comparing one age with another. 
 They remembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for a lost bicycle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister's face, the swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago: but all the relevant facts were outside the range of all the relevant facts vision. 
 They were like the ant, which can see small objects but not large ones. 
 And when memory failed and written records were falsified--when that happened, the claim of the Party to have improved the conditions of human life had got to be accepted, because there did not exist, and never again could exist, any standard against which it could be tested. 
 He halted and looked up. 
 He was in a narrow street, with a few dark little shops, interspersed among dwelling-houses. 
 Immediately above  immediately head there hung three discoloured metal balls which looked as if they had once been gilded. 
 He seemed to know the place. 
 Of course! 
 He was standing outside the junk-shop where he had bought the diary. 
  A twinge of fear went through him. 
 It had been a sufficiently rash act to buy the book in the beginning, and he had sworn never to come near the place again. 
 And yet the instant that he allowed his thoughts to wander, his feet had brought him back here of their own accord. 
 It was precisely against suicidal impulses of this kind that he had hoped to guard himself by opening the diary. 
 At the same time he noticed that although it was nearly twenty-one hours the shop was still open. 
 With the feeling that he would be less conspicuous inside than hanging about on the pavement, he stepped through the doorway. 
 He was a man of perhaps sixty, frail and bowed, with a long, benevolent nose, and mild eyes distorted by thick spectacles. 
 His spectacles, his gentle, fussy movements, and the fact that he was wearing an aged jacket of black velvet, gave him a vague air of intellectuality, as though he had been some kind of literary man, or perhaps a musician. 
 His voice was soft, as though faded, and his accent less debased than that of the majority of proles. 
  'I recognized you on the pavement,' he said immediately. 
 'You're the gentleman that bought the young lady's keepsake album. 
 Cream-laid, it used to be called. 
 There's been no paper like that made for--oh, I dare say fifty years. 
' He peered at Winston over the top of his spectacles. 
 'Is there anything special I can do for you? 
 Or did you just want to look round? 
'  'I was passing,' said Winston vaguely. 
 'I just looked in. 
 I don't want anything in particular. 
' He made an apologetic gesture with his softpalmed hand. 
 'You see how it is; an empty shop, you might say. 
 Between you and me, the antique trade's just about finished. 
 Furniture, china, glass it's all been broken up by degrees. 
 I haven't seen a brass candlestick in years. 
 In the window there were trays of nuts and bolts, worn-out chisels, penknives with broken blades, tarnished watches that did not even pretend to be in going order, and other miscellaneous rubbish. 
 Only on a small table in the corner was there a litter of odds and ends--lacquered snuffboxes, agate brooches, and the like--which looked as though they might include something interesting. 
 As Winston wandered towards the table winston eye was caught by a round, smooth thing that gleamed softly in the lamplight, and winston picked his eye up. 
  It was a heavy lump of glass, curved on one side, flat on the other, making almost a hemisphere. 
 At the heart of it, magnified by the curved surface, there was a strange, pink, convoluted object that recalled a rose or a sea anemone. 
  'What is it? 
' said Winston, fascinated. 
  'That's coral, that is,' said the old man. 
 They used to kind of embed it in the glass. 
 That wasn't made less than a hundred years ago. 
 More, by the look of it. 
'  'It's a beautiful thing,' said Winston. 
  'It is a beautiful thing,' said the other appreciatively. 
' He coughed. 
 'Now, if it so happened that you wanted to buy it, that'd cost you four dollars. 
 I can remember when a thing like that would have fetched eight pounds, and eight pounds was--well, I can't work eight pounds out, but eight pounds was a lot of money. 
 But who cares about genuine antiques nowadays--even the few that's left? 
'  Winston immediately paid over the four dollars and slid the coveted thing into winston pocket. 
 What appealed to him about it was not so much its beauty as the air it seemed to possess of belonging to an age quite different from the present one. 
 The soft, rainwatery glass was not like any glass that he had ever seen. 
 The thing was doubly attractive because of  the thing apparent uselessness, though he could guess that  the thing must once have been intended as a paperweight. 
 It was very heavy in his pocket, but fortunately it did not make much of a bulge. 
 It was a queer thing, even a compromising thing, for a Party member to have in his possession. 
 The old man had grown noticeably more cheerful after receiving the four dollars. 
 Winston realized that  winston would have accepted three or even two. 
  'There's another room upstairs that you might care to take a look at,' he said. 
 'There's not much in it. 
 We'll do with a light if we're going upstairs. 
'  He lit another lamp, and, with bowed back, led the way slowly up the steep and worn stairs and along a tiny passage, into a room which did not give on the street but looked out on a cobbled yard and a forest of chimney-pots. 
 Winston noticed that the furniture was still arranged as though the room were meant to be lived in. 
 An old-fashioned glass clock with a twelve-hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece. 
 Under the window, and occupying nearly a quarter of the room, was an enormous bed with the mattress still on the mattress. 
  'We lived here till my wife died,' said the old man half apologetically. 
 'I'm selling the furniture off by little and little. 
 Now that's a beautiful mahogany bed, or at least it would be if you could get the bugs out of it. 
 But I dare say you'd find it a little bit cumbersome. 
'  He was holding the lamp high up, so as to illuminate the whole room, and in the warm dim light the place looked curiously inviting. 
 The thought flitted through Winston's mind that it would probably be quite easy to rent the room for a few dollars a week, if he dared to take the risk. 
 It was a wild, impossible notion, to be abandoned as soon as thought of; but the room had awakened in thought a sort of nostalgia, a sort of ancestral memory. 
 It seemed to him that he knew exactly what it felt like to sit in a room like this, in an arm-chair beside an open fire with your feet in the fender and a kettle on the hob; utterly alone, utterly secure, with nobody watching you, no voice pursuing you, no sound except the singing of the kettle and the friendly ticking of the clock. 
' he could not help murmuring. 
  'Ah,' said the old man, 'I never had one of those things. 
 And I never seemed to feel the need of it, somehow. 
 Now that's a nice gateleg table in the corner there. 
 Though of course you'd have to put new hinges on it if you wanted to use the flaps. 
 It contained nothing but rubbish. 
 It was very unlikely that there existed anywhere in Oceania a copy of a book printed earlier than 1960. 
 The old man, still carrying the lamp, was standing in front of a picture in a rosewood frame which hung on the other side of the fireplace, opposite the bed. 
  'Now, if you happen to be interested in old prints at all----' all----' began delicately. 
  Winston came across to examine the picture. 
 It was a steel engraving of an oval building with rectangular windows, and a small tower in front. 
 Winston gazed at it for some moments. 
 It seemed vaguely familiar, though he did not remember the statue. 
  'The frame's fixed to the wall,' said the old man, 'but I could unscrew it for you, I dare say. 
 'It's a ruin now. 
 It's in the middle of the street outside the Palace of Justice. 
 It was bombed in--oh, many years ago. 
 It was a church at one time, St Clement Danes, st clement danes name was. 
' He smiled apologetically, as though conscious of saying something slightly ridiculous, and added: 'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's! 
' said Winston. 
 How it goes on I don't remember, but I do know it ended up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, Here comes a chopper to chop off your head."  It was a kind of a dance. 
 They held out their arms for you to pass under, and when they came to "Here comes a chopper to chop off your head"  they brought their arms down and caught you. 
 It was just names of churches. 
 All the London churches were in it--all the principal ones, that is. 
'  Winston wondered vaguely to what century the church belonged. 
 It was always difficult to determine the age of a London building. 
 Anything large and impressive, if it was reasonably new in appearance, was automatically claimed as having been built since the Revolution, while anything that was obviously of earlier date was ascribed to some dim period called the Middle Ages. 
 One could not learn history from architecture any more than one could learn it from books. 
  'I never knew it had been a church,' he said. 
  'There's a lot of them left, really,' said the old man, 'though they've been put to other uses. 
 I've got it! 
   there, now, that's as far as I can get. 
' said Winston. 
 It's in Victory Square, alongside the picture gallery. 
 It was a museum used for propaganda displays of various kinds--scale models of rocket bombs and Floating Fortresses, waxwork tableaux illustrating enemy atrocities, and the like. 
  'St Martin's-in-the-Fields it used to be called,' supplemented the old man, 'though I don't recollect any fields anywhere in those parts. 
'  Winston did not buy the picture. 
 It would have been an even more incongruous possession than the glass paperweight, and impossible to carry home, unless it were taken out of its frame. 
 But he lingered for some minutes more, talking to the old man, whose name, he discovered, was not Weeks--as one might have gathered from the inscription over the shop-front--but Charrington. 
 Mr Charrington, it seemed, was a widower aged sixty-three and had inhabited this shop for thirty years. 
 Throughout that time he had been intending to alter the name over the window, but had never quite got to the point of doing it. 
 All the while that they were talking the half-remembered rhyme kept running through Winston's head. 
 Oranges and lemons say the bells of St Clement's, You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's! 
 It was curious, but when you said it to yourself you had the illusion of actually hearing bells, the bells of a lost London that still existed somewhere or other, disguised and forgotten. 
 From one ghostly steeple after another he seemed to hear them pealing forth. 
 Yet so far as he could remember he had never in real life heard church bells ringing. 
  He got away from Mr Charrington and went down the stairs alone, so as not to let the old man see the old man reconnoitring the street before stepping out of the door. 
 He had already made up his mind that after a suitable interval--a month, say--he would take the risk of visiting the shop again. 
 It was perhaps not more dangerous than shirking an evening at the Centre. 
  Yes, he thought again, he would come back. 
 He would buy further scraps of beautiful rubbish. 
 He would buy the engraving of St Clement Danes, take the engraving of st clement danes out of the engraving of st clement danes frame, and carry the engraving of st clement danes home concealed under the jacket of his overalls. 
 He would drag the rest of that poem out of Mr Charrington's memory. 
 Even the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs flashed momentarily through  even the lunatic project of renting the room upstairs mind again. 
 For perhaps five seconds exaltation made him careless, and he stepped out on to the pavement without so much as a preliminary glance through the window. 
 He had even started humming to an improvised tune     Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,   You owe me three farthings, say the----   Suddenly his heart seemed to turn to ice and his bowels to water. 
 It was the girl from the Fiction Department, the girl with dark hair. 
 She looked him straight in the face, then walked quickly on as though she had not seen him. 
  For a few seconds Winston was too paralysed to move. 
 Then he turned to the right and walked heavily away, not noticing for the moment that he was going in the wrong direction. 
 She must have followed him here, because it was not credible that by pure chance she should have happened to be walking on the same evening up the same obscure backstreet, kilometres distant from any quarter where Party members lived. 
 It was too great a coincidence. 
 It was enough that she was watching him. 
 Probably she had seen him go into the pub as well. 
  It was an effort to walk. 
 The lump of glass in  the lump pocket banged against  the lump thigh at each step, and  the lump was half minded to take it out and throw it away. 
  The street was a blind alley. 
 Winston halted, stood for several seconds wondering vaguely what to do, then turned round and began to retrace  winston steps. 
 As   turned   occurred to   that the girl had only passed   three minutes ago and that by running   could probably catch up with the girl. 
 He could keep on her track till they were in some quiet place, and then smash her skull in with a cobblestone. 
 The piece of glass in his pocket would be heavy enough for the job. 
 But he abandoned the idea immediately, because even the thought of making any physical effort was unbearable. 
 He could not run, he could not strike a blow. 
 Besides, she was young and lusty and would defend herself. 
 He thought also of hurrying to the Community Centre and staying there till the place closed, so as to establish a partial alibi for the evening. 
 A deadly lassitude had taken hold of him. 
 All he wanted was to get home quickly and then sit down and be quiet. 
  It was after twenty-two hours when he got back to the flat. 
 He went into the kitchen and swallowed nearly a teacupful of Victory Gin. 
 Then he went to the table in the alcove, sat down, and took the diary out of the drawer. 
 But he did not open it at once. 
 He sat staring at the marbled cover of the book, trying without success to shut the voice out of his consciousness. 
  It was at night that they came for you, always at night. 
 The proper thing was to kill yourself before they got you. 
 Undoubtedly some people did so. 
 But it needed desperate courage to kill yourself in a world where firearms, or any quick and certain poison, were completely unprocurable. 
 He thought with a kind of astonishment of the biological uselessness of pain and fear, the treachery of the human body which always freezes into inertia at exactly the moment when a special effort is needed. 
 He might have silenced the dark-haired girl if only he had acted quickly enough: but precisely because of the extremity of his danger he had lost the power to act. 
 It struck him that in moments of crisis one is never fighting against an external enemy, but always against one's own body. 
 Even now, in spite of the gin, the dull ache in his belly made consecutive thought impossible. 
 And it is the same, he perceived, in all seemingly heroic or tragic situations. 
 On the battlefield, in the torture chamber, on a sinking ship, the issues that you are fighting for are always forgotten, because the body swells up until the body fills the universe, and even when you are not paralysed by fright or screaming with pain, life is a moment-to-moment struggle against hunger or cold or sleeplessness, against a sour stomach or an aching tooth. 
  He opened the diary. 
 It was important to write something down. 
 Her voice seemed to stick into  her voice brain like jagged splinters of glass. 
 He tried to think of O'Brien, for whom, or to whom, the diary was written, but instead he began thinking of the things that would happen to him after the Thought Police took him away. 
 It would not matter if they killed you at once. 
 To be killed was what you expected. 
  Why did you have to endure it, since the end was always the same? 
 Why was it not possible to cut a few days or weeks out of your life? 
 When once you had succumbed to thoughtcrime it was certain that by a given date you would be dead. 
 Why then did that horror, which altered nothing, have to lie embedded in future time? 
  He tried with a little more success than before to summon up the image of O'Brien. 
 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' O'Brien had said to o'brien. 
 He knew what what meant, or thought he knew. 
 But with the voice from the telescreen nagging at his ears he could not follow the train of thought further. 
 He put a cigarette in his mouth. 
 Half the tobacco promptly fell out on to  half tongue, a bitter dust which was difficult to spit out again. 
 The face of Big Brother swam into his mind, displacing that of O'Brien. 
 Just as he had done a few days earlier, he slid a coin out of his pocket and looked at a coin. 
 The face gazed up at  the face, heavy, calm, protecting: but what kind of smile was hidden beneath the dark moustache? 
 Like a leaden knell the words came back at him:     WAR IS PEACE   FREEDOM IS SLAVERY   IGNORANCE IS STRENGTH      PART TWO     Chapter 1    It was the middle of the morning, and Winston had left the cubicle to go to the lavatory. 
  A solitary figure was coming towards   a solitary figure from the other end of the long, brightly-lit corridor. 
 It was the girl with dark hair. 
 Four days had gone past since the evening when he had run into her outside the junk-shop. 
 As   came nearer   saw that   right arm was in a sling, not noticeable at a distance because it was of the same colour as   overalls. 
 Probably she had crushed her hand while swinging round one of the big kaleidoscopes on which the plots of novels were 'roughed in'. 
 It was a common accident in the Fiction Department. 
  They were perhaps four metres apart when the girl stumbled and fell almost flat on the girl face. 
 She must have fallen right on the injured arm. 
 Winston stopped short. 
 The girl had risen to  the girl knees. 
 Her face had turned a milky yellow colour against which her mouth stood out redder than ever. 
  A curious emotion stirred in Winston's heart. 
 In front of him was an enemy who was trying to kill him: in front of him, also, was a human creature, in pain and perhaps with a broken bone. 
 Already he had instinctively started forward to help her. 
 In the moment when he had seen her fall on the bandaged arm, the bandaged arm had been as though he felt the pain in his own body. 
  'You're hurt? 
' he said. 
  'It's nothing. 
 It'll be all right in a second. 
'  She spoke as though her heart were fluttering. 
 She had certainly turned very pale. 
  'You haven't broken anything? 
 It hurt for a moment, that's all. 
'  She held out her free hand to him, and he helped her up. 
 She had regained some of her colour, and appeared very much better. 
  'It's nothing,' she repeated shortly. 
 'I only gave my wrist a bit of a bang. 
 Thanks, comrade! 
 The whole incident could not have taken as much as half a minute. 
 Not to let one's feelings appear in one's face was a habit that had acquired the status of an instinct, and in any case they had been standing straight in front of a telescreen when the thing happened. 
 Nevertheless it had been very difficult not to betray a momentary surprise, for in the two or three seconds while he was helping her up the girl had slipped something into his hand. 
 There was no question that she had done it intentionally. 
 It was something small and flat. 
 It was a scrap of paper folded into a square. 
  While    stood at the urinal    managed, with a little more fingering, to get it unfolded. 
 Obviously there must be a message of some kind written on it. 
 For a moment  for a moment was tempted to take  for a moment into one of the water-closets and read  for a moment at once. 
 But that would be shocking folly, as he well knew. 
 There was no place where you could be more certain that the telescreens were watched continuously. 
  He went back to his cubicle, sat down, threw the fragment of paper casually among the other papers on the desk, put on his spectacles and hitched the speakwrite towards him. 
 'Five minutes,' he told himself, 'five minutes at the very least! 
' His heart bumped in his breast with frightening loudness. 
 Fortunately the piece of work he was engaged on was mere routine, the rectification of a long list of figures, not needing close attention. 
 So far as he could see there were two possibilities. 
 One, much the more likely, was that the girl was an agent of the Thought Police, just as he had feared. 
 He did not know why the Thought Police should choose to deliver the thought police messages in such a fashion, but perhaps the thought police had the thought police reasons. 
 The thing that was written on the paper might be a threat, a summons, an order to commit suicide, a trap of some description. 
 But there was another, wilder possibility that kept raising its head, though he tried vainly to suppress it. 
 This was, that the message did not come from the Thought Police at all, but from some kind of underground organization. 
 Perhaps the girl was part of it! 
 No doubt the idea was absurd, but the idea had sprung into his mind in the very instant of feeling the scrap of paper in his hand. 
 It was not till a couple of minutes later that the other, more probable explanation had occurred to him. 
 And even now, though his intellect told him that the message probably meant death--still, that was not what he believed, and the unreasonable hope persisted, and his heart banged, and it was with difficulty that he kept his voice from trembling as he murmured his figures into the speakwrite. 
  He rolled up the completed bundle of work and slid the completed bundle of work into the pneumatic tube. 
 Eight minutes had gone by. 
 He re-adjusted his spectacles on his nose, sighed, and drew the next batch of work towards him, with the scrap of paper on top of it. 
 He flattened it out. 
 On it was written, in a large unformed handwriting:  I LOVE YOU. 
  For several seconds he was too stunned even to throw the incriminating thing into the memory hole. 
 When he did so, although he knew very well the danger of showing too much interest, he could not resist reading the danger once again, just to make sure that the words were really there. 
  For the rest of the morning it was very difficult to work. 
 What was even worse than having to focus his mind on a series of niggling jobs was the need to conceal his agitation from the telescreen. 
 He felt as though a fire were burning in his belly. 
 He had hoped to be alone for a little while during the lunch hour, but as bad luck would have it the imbecile Parsons flopped down beside him, the tang of his sweat almost defeating the tinny smell of stew, and kept up a stream of talk about the preparations for Hate Week. 
 He was particularly enthusiastic about a papier-mache model of Big Brother's head, two metres wide, which was being made for the occasion by his daughter's troop of Spies. 
 The irritating thing was that in the racket of voices Winston could hardly hear what Parsons was saying, and was constantly having to ask for some fatuous remark to be repeated. 
 Just once he caught a glimpse of the girl, at a table with two other girls at the far end of the room. 
 She appeared not to have seen him, and he did not look in that direction again. 
 Immediately after lunch there arrived a delicate, difficult piece of work which would take several hours and necessitated putting everything else aside. 
 It consisted in falsifying a series of production reports of two years ago, in such a way as to cast discredit on a prominent member of the Inner Party, who was now under a cloud. 
 This was the kind of thing that Winston was good at, and for more than two hours winston succeeded in shutting the girl out of winston mind altogether. 
 Then the memory of her face came back, and with the memory of her face a raging, intolerable desire to be alone. 
 He wolfed another tasteless meal in the canteen, hurried off to the Centre, took part in the solemn foolery of a 'discussion group', played two games of table tennis, swallowed several glasses of gin, and sat for half an hour through a lecture entitled 'Ingsoc in relation to chess'. 
 His soul writhed with boredom, but for once he had had no impulse to shirk his evening at the Centre. 
 At the sight of the words I LOVE YOU the desire to stay alive had welled up in him, and the taking of minor risks suddenly seemed stupid. 
 It was not till twenty-three hours, when he was home and in bed--in the darkness, where you were safe even from the telescreen so long as you kept silent--that he was able to think continuously. 
  It was a physical problem that had to be solved: how to get in touch with the girl and arrange a meeting. 
 He did not consider any longer the possibility that she might be laying some kind of trap for him. 
 He knew that it was not so, because of her unmistakable agitation when she handed him the note. 
 Obviously she had been frightened out of her wits, as well she might be. 
 Nor did the idea of refusing  nor advances even cross his mind. 
 Only five nights ago he had contemplated smashing her skull in with a cobblestone, but that was of no importance. 
 He thought of her naked, youthful body, as he had seen it in his dream. 
 He had imagined her a fool like all the rest of them, her head stuffed with lies and hatred, her belly full of ice. 
 A kind of fever seized him at the thought that he might lose her, the white youthful body might slip away from him! 
 What  what feared more than anything else was that she would simply change her mind if  what did not get in touch with her quickly. 
 It was like trying to make a move at chess when you were already mated. 
 Whichever way you turned, the telescreen faced you. 
 Actually, all the possible ways of communicating with her had occurred to him within five minutes of reading the note; but now, with time to think, he went over them one by one, as though laying out a row of instruments on a table. 
  Obviously the kind of encounter that had happened this morning could not be repeated. 
 If   had worked in the Records Department   might have been comparatively simple, but   had only a very dim idea whereabouts in the building the Fiction Department lay, and   had no pretext for going there. 
 If   had known where   lived, and at what time   left work,   could have contrived to meet   somewhere on   way home; but to try to follow   home was not safe, because it would mean loitering about outside the Ministry, which was bound to be noticed. 
 As for sending a letter through the mails, it was out of the question. 
 Actually, few people ever wrote letters. 
 For the messages that it was occasionally necessary to send, there were printed postcards with long lists of phrases, and you struck out the ones that were inapplicable. 
 In any case he did not know the girl's name, let alone the girl address. 
 Finally he decided that the safest place was the canteen. 
 If   could get   at a table by  , somewhere in the middle of the room, not too near the telescreens, and with a sufficient buzz of conversation all round--if these conditions endured for, say, thirty seconds, it might be possible to exchange a few words. 
  For a week after this, life was like a restless dream. 
 On the next day  on the next day did not appear in the canteen until he was leaving it, the whistle having already blown. 
 They passed each other without a glance. 
 On the day after that she was in the canteen at the usual time, but with three other girls and immediately under a telescreen. 
 Then for three dreadful days she did not appear at all. 
 His whole mind and body seemed to be afflicted with an unbearable sensitivity, a sort of transparency, which made every movement, every sound, every contact, every word that he had to speak or listen to, an agony. 
 He did not touch the diary during those days. 
 If there was any relief, it was in   work, in which   could sometimes forget   for ten minutes at a stretch. 
 He had absolutely no clue as to what had happened to her. 
 There was no enquiry he could make. 
 She might have been vaporized, she might have committed suicide, she might have been transferred to the other end of Oceania: worst and likeliest of all, she might simply have changed her mind and decided to avoid suicide. 
  The next day   the next day reappeared. 
 Her arm was out of the sling and she had a band of sticking-plaster round her wrist. 
 The relief of seeing her was so great that he could not resist staring directly at her for several seconds. 
 On the following day he very nearly succeeded in speaking to her. 
 When he came into the canteen she was sitting at a table well out from the wall, and was quite alone. 
 It was early, and the place was not very full. 
 The queue edged forward till Winston was almost at the counter, then was held up for two minutes because someone in front was complaining that someone in front had not received someone in front tablet of saccharine. 
 But the girl was still alone when Winston secured winston tray and began to make for the girl table. 
 He walked casually towards her, his eyes searching for a place at some table beyond her. 
 She was perhaps three metres away from him. 
 Another two seconds would do it. 
 Then a voice behind him called, 'Smith! 
' He pretended not to hear. 
 'Smith! 
' repeated the voice, more loudly. 
 It was no use. 
 He turned round. 
 A blond-headed, silly-faced young man named Wilsher, whom he barely knew, was inviting him with a smile to a vacant place at his table. 
 It was not safe to refuse. 
 After having been recognized,   could not go and sit at a table with an unattended girl. 
 It was too noticeable. 
 He sat down with a friendly smile. 
 The silly blond face beamed into  the silly blond face. 
 Winston had a hallucination of  winston smashing a pick-axe right into the middle of it. 
 The girl's table filled up a few minutes later. 
  But she must have seen him coming towards her, and perhaps she would take the hint. 
 Next day he took care to arrive early. 
 Surely enough, she was at a table in about the same place, and again alone. 
 The person immediately ahead of him in the queue was a small, swiftly-moving, beetle-like man with a flat face and tiny, suspicious eyes. 
 As Winston turned away from the counter with winston tray, winston saw that the little man was making straight for the girl's table. 
 There was a vacant place at a table further away, but something in the little man's appearance suggested that the little man would be sufficiently attentive to the little man own comfort to choose the emptiest table. 
 With ice at his heart Winston followed. 
 It was no use unless he could get the girl alone. 
 At this moment there was a tremendous crash. 
 The little man was sprawling on all fours,  the little man tray had gone flying, two streams of soup and coffee were flowing across the floor. 
 He started to his feet with a malignant glance at Winston, whom he evidently suspected of having tripped him up. 
 But it was all right. 
 Five seconds later, with a thundering heart, Winston was sitting at the girl's table. 
  He did not look at her. 
 He unpacked his tray and promptly began eating. 
 It was all-important to speak at once, before anyone else came, but now a terrible fear had taken possession of him. 
 A week had gone by since she had first approached him. 
 She would have changed her mind, she must have changed her mind! 
 It was impossible that this affair should end successfully; such things did not happen in real life. 
 He might have flinched altogether from speaking if at this moment he had not seen Ampleforth, the hairy-eared poet, wandering limply round the room with a tray, looking for a place to sit down. 
 In his vague way Ampleforth was attached to Winston, and would certainly sit down at his table if he caught sight of him. 
 Both Winston and the girl were eating steadily. 
 In a low murmur Winston began speaking. 
  'What time do you leave work? 
'  'Where can we meet? 
'  'It's full of telescreens. 
'  'It doesn't matter if there's a crowd. 
 Don't come up to me until you see me among a lot of people. 
'  'All right. 
'  Ampleforth failed to see Winston and sat down at another table. 
 They did not speak again, and, so far as it was possible for two people sitting on opposite sides of the same table, they did not look at one another. 
 The girl finished  the girl lunch quickly and made off, while Winston stayed to smoke a cigarette. 
  Winston was in Victory Square before the appointed time. 
 He wandered round the base of the enormous fluted column, at the top of which Big Brother's statue gazed southward towards the skies where he had vanquished the Eurasian aeroplanes (the Eastasian aeroplanes, the eurasian aeroplanes ( had been, a few years ago) in the Battle of Airstrip One. 
 In the street in front of it there was a statue of a man on horseback which was supposed to represent Oliver Cromwell. 
 At five minutes past the hour the girl had still not appeared. 
 Again the terrible fear seized upon Winston. 
 She was not coming, she had changed her mind! 
 He walked slowly up to the north side of the square and got a sort of pale-coloured pleasure from identifying St Martin's Church, whose bells, when it had bells, had chimed 'You owe me three farthings. 
' Then he saw the girl standing at the base of the monument, reading or pretending to read a poster which ran spirally up the column. 
 It was not safe to go near her until some more people had accumulated. 
 But at this moment there was a din of shouting and a zoom of heavy vehicles from somewhere to the left. 
 The girl nipped nimbly round the lions at the base of the monument and joined in the rush. 
 Winston followed. 
 Winston, at normal times the kind of person who gravitates to the outer edge of any kind of scrimmage, shoved, butted, squirmed  winston way forward into the heart of the crowd. 
 Soon he was within arm's length of the girl, but the way was blocked by an enormous prole and an almost equally enormous woman, presumably his wife, who seemed to form an impenetrable wall of flesh. 
 Winston wriggled  winston sideways, and with a violent lunge managed to drive  winston shoulder between them. 
 For a moment  for a moment felt as though his entrails were being ground to pulp between the two muscular hips, then he had broken through, sweating a little. 
 He was next to the girl. 
 They were shoulder to shoulder, both staring fixedly in front of them. 
 Winston knew they were there but  winston saw them only intermittently. 
 The girl's shoulder, and  the girl arm right down to the elbow, were pressed against his. 
 Her cheek was almost near enough for  her cheek to feel  her cheek warmth. 
 She had immediately taken charge of the situation, just as she had done in the canteen. 
 She began speaking in the same expressionless voice as before, with lips barely moving, a mere murmur easily drowned by the din of voices and the rumbling of the trucks. 
  'Can you hear me? 
 You'll have to remember this. 
 A half-hour railway journey; turn left outside the station; two kilometres along the road; a gate with the top bar missing; a path across a field; a grass-grown lane; a track between bushes; a dead tree with moss on it. 
 It was as though she had a map inside her head. 
 'Can you remember all that? 
' she murmured finally. 
 You may have to wait. 
 I'll get there by another way. 
 Are you sure you remember everything? 
'  'Then get away from me as quick as you can. 
'  She need not have told him that. 
 But for the moment they could not extricate themselves from the crowd. 
 The trucks were still filing past, the people still insatiably gaping. 
 At the start there had been a few boos and hisses, but it came only from the Party members among the crowd, and had soon stopped. 
 The prevailing emotion was simply curiosity. 
 Foreigners, whether from Eurasia or from Eastasia, were a kind of strange animal. 
 One literally never saw them except in the guise of prisoners, and even as prisoners one never got more than a momentary glimpse of them. 
 From over scrubby cheekbones eyes looked into Winston's, sometimes with strange intensity, and flashed away again. 
 In the last truck  in the last truck could see an aged man,  in the last truck face a mass of grizzled hair, standing upright with wrists crossed in front of  in the last truck, as though  in the last truck were used to having them bound together. 
 It was almost time for Winston and the girl to part. 
 But at the last moment, while the crowd still hemmed the crowd in, her hand felt for her hand and gave her hand a fleeting squeeze. 
  It could not have been ten seconds, and yet it seemed a long time that their hands were clasped together. 
 He had time to learn every detail of her hand. 
 He explored the long fingers, the shapely nails, the work-hardened palm with its row of callouses, the smooth flesh under the wrist. 
 Merely from feeling it he would have known it by sight. 
 In the same instant it occurred to him that he did not know what colour the girl's eyes were. 
 They were probably brown, but people with dark hair sometimes had blue eyes. 
 To turn his head and look at her would have been inconceivable folly. 
 With hands locked together, invisible among the press of bodies, the press stared steadily in front of the press, and instead of the eyes of the girl, the eyes of the aged prisoner gazed mournfully at Winston out of nests of hair. 
     Chapter 2    Winston picked      chapter 2    winston way up the lane through dappled light and shade, stepping out into pools of gold wherever the boughs parted. 
 Under the trees to the left of him the ground was misty with bluebells. 
 It was the second of May. 
  He was a bit early. 
 There had been no difficulties about the journey, and the girl was so evidently experienced that he was less frightened than he would normally have been. 
 Presumably  presumably could be trusted to find a safe place. 
 In general you could not assume that you were much safer in the country than in London. 
 There were no telescreens, of course, but there was always the danger of concealed microphones by which your voice might be picked up and recognized; besides, it was not easy to make a journey by yourself without attracting attention. 
 For distances of less than 100 kilometres it was not necessary to get your passport endorsed, but sometimes there were patrols hanging about the railway stations, who examined the papers of any Party member they found there and asked awkward questions. 
 However, no patrols had appeared, and on the walk from the station he had made sure by cautious backward glances that he was not being followed. 
 The train was full of proles, in holiday mood because of the summery weather. 
 The wooden-seated carriage in which he travelled was filled to overflowing by a single enormous family, ranging from a toothless great-grandmother to a month-old baby, going out to spend an afternoon with 'in-laws' in the country, and, as they freely explained to Winston, to get hold of a little black-market butter. 
  The lane widened, and in a minute he came to the footpath she had told him of, a mere cattle-track which plunged between the bushes. 
 He had no watch, but it could not be fifteen yet. 
 He knelt down and began picking some partly to pass the time away, but also from a vague idea that he would like to have a bunch of flowers to offer to the girl when they met. 
 He had got together a big bunch and was smelling a big bunch faint sickly scent when a sound at his back froze him, the unmistakable crackle of a foot on twigs. 
 He went on picking bluebells. 
 It was the best thing to do. 
 It might be the girl, or he might have been followed after all. 
 He picked another and another. 
  He looked up. 
 It was the girl. 
 She shook her head, evidently as a warning that he must keep silent, then parted the bushes and quickly led the way along the narrow track into the wood. 
 Obviously she had been that way before, for she dodged the boggy bits as though by habit. 
 Winston followed, still clasping  winston bunch of flowers. 
 His first feeling was relief, but as he watched the strong slender body moving in front of him, with the scarlet sash that was just tight enough to bring out the curve of scarlet hips, the sense of his own inferiority was heavy upon him. 
 Even now it seemed quite likely that when she turned round and looked at him she would draw back after all. 
 The sweetness of the air and the greenness of the leaves daunted him. 
 Already on the walk from the station the May sunshine had made him feel dirty and etiolated, a creature of indoors, with the sooty dust of London in the pores of his skin. 
 It occurred to him that till now she had probably never seen him in broad daylight in the open. 
 They came to the fallen tree that she had spoken of. 
 The girl hopped over and forced apart the bushes, in which there did not seem to be an opening. 
 When Winston followed her, winston found that they were in a natural clearing, a tiny grassy knoll surrounded by tall saplings that shut it in completely. 
 The girl stopped and turned. 
  'Here we are,' she said. 
  He was facing her at several paces' distance. 
  'I didn't want to say anything in the lane,' she went on, 'in case there's a mike hidden there. 
 I don't suppose there is, but there could be. 
 We're all right here. 
'  He still had not the courage to approach her. 
 'We're all right here? 
' he repeated stupidly. 
' They were small ashes, which at some time had been cut down and had sprouted up again into a forest of poles, none of them thicker than one's wrist. 
 Besides, I've been here before. 
'  They were only making conversation. 
 He had managed to move closer to her now. 
 She stood before him very upright, with a smile on her face that looked faintly ironical, as though she were wondering why he was so slow to act. 
 They seemed to have fallen of their own accord. 
 He took her hand. 
  'Would you believe,' he said, 'that till this moment I didn't know what colour your eyes were? 
' They were brown, he noted, a rather light shade of brown, with dark lashes. 
 'Now that you've seen what I'm really like, can you still bear to look at me? 
'  'I'm thirty-nine years old. 
 I've got a wife that I can't get rid of. 
 I've got varicose veins. 
 I've got five false teeth. 
'  'I couldn't care less,' said the girl. 
  The next moment, it was hard to say by whose act, she was in whose act arms. 
 At the beginning he had no feeling except sheer incredulity. 
 The youthful body was strained against  the youthful body own, the mass of dark hair was against  the youthful body face, and yes! 
 actually she had turned her face up and he was kissing the wide red mouth. 
 She had clasped her arms about his neck, she was calling him darling, precious one, loved one. 
 He had pulled her down on to the ground, she was utterly unresisting, he could do what he liked with her. 
 But the truth was that he had no physical sensation, except that of mere contact. 
 All he felt was incredulity and pride. 
 He was glad that this was happening, but he had no physical desire. 
 It was too soon, her youth and prettiness had frightened him, he was too much used to living without women--he did not know the reason. 
 The girl picked  the girl up and pulled a bluebell out of  the girl hair. 
 She sat against him, putting her arm round his waist. 
  'Never mind, dear. 
 I found it when I got lost once on a community hike. 
 If anyone was coming you could hear anyone a hundred metres away. 
'  'What is your name? 
' said Winston. 
 I know yours. 
 It's Winston--Winston Smith. 
 Tell me, what did you think of me before that day I gave you the note? 
 It was even a sort of love-offering to start off by telling the worst. 
  'I hated the sight of you,' he said. 
 'I wanted to rape you and then murder you afterwards. 
 Two weeks ago I thought seriously of smashing your head in with a cobblestone. 
 If you really want to know, I imagined that you had something to do with the Thought Police. 
 You didn't honestly think that? 
 But from your general appearance--merely because you're young and fresh and healthy, you understand--I thought that probably----'  'You thought I was a good Party member. 
 Pure in word and deed. 
 And you thought that if I had a quarter of a chance I'd denounce you as a thought-criminal and get you killed off? 
'  'Yes, something of that kind. 
 A great many young girls are like that, you know. 
'  'It's this bloody thing that does it,' she said, ripping off the scarlet sash of the Junior Anti-Sex League and flinging the scarlet sash of the junior anti-sex league on to a bough. 
 Then, as though touching her waist had reminded her of something, she felt in the pocket of her overalls and produced a small slab of chocolate. 
 She broke it in half and gave one of the pieces to Winston. 
 Even before he had taken it he knew by the smell that it was very unusual chocolate. 
 It was dark and shiny, and was wrapped in silver paper. 
 Chocolate normally was dull-brown crumbly stuff that tasted, as nearly as one could describe it, like the smoke of a rubbish fire. 
 But at some time or another he had tasted chocolate like the piece she had given him. 
 The first whiff of its scent had stirred up some memory which he could not pin down, but which was powerful and troubling. 
  'Where did you get this stuff? 
' he said. 
  'Black market,' she said indifferently. 
 'Actually I am that sort of girl, to look at. 
 I'm good at games. 
 I was a troop-leader in the Spies. 
 I do voluntary work three evenings a week for the Junior Anti-Sex League. 
 Hours and hours I've spent pasting their bloody rot all over London. 
 I always carry one end of a banner in the processions. 
 I always look cheerful and I never shirk anything. 
 Always yell with the crowd, that's what I say. 
 It's the only way to be safe. 
 But there was still that memory moving round the edges of his consciousness, something strongly felt but not reducible to definite shape, like an object seen out of the corner of one's eye. 
 He pushed it away from him, aware only that it was the memory of some action which he would have liked to undo but could not. 
  'You are very young,' he said. 
 'You are ten or fifteen years younger than I am. 
 What could you see to attract you in a man like me? 
'  'It was something in your face. 
 I thought I'd take a chance. 
 I'm good at spotting people who don't belong. 
 As soon as I saw you I knew you were against THEM. 
 A thing that astonished him about her was the coarseness of her language. 
 Party members were supposed not to swear, and Winston himself very seldom did swear, aloud, at any rate. 
 Julia, however, seemed unable to mention the Party, and especially the Inner Party, without using the kind of words that you saw chalked up in dripping alley-ways. 
 He did not dislike it. 
 It was merely one symptom of her revolt against the Party and all the party ways, and somehow the party seemed natural and healthy, like the sneeze of a horse that smells bad hay. 
 They had left the clearing and were wandering again through the chequered shade, with their arms round each other's waists whenever it was wide enough to walk two abreast. 
 He noticed how much softer her waist seemed to feel now that the sash was gone. 
 They did not speak above a whisper. 
 Outside the clearing, Julia said, it was better to go quietly. 
 She stopped him. 
 We're all right if we keep behind the boughs. 
 Winston looked out into the field beyond, and underwent a curious, slow shock of recognition. 
 He knew it by sight. 
 An old, close-bitten pasture, with a footpath wandering across it and a molehill here and there. 
' he whispered. 
  'That's right, there is a stream. 
 It's at the edge of the next field, actually. 
 There are fish in it, great big ones. 
 You can watch them lying in the pools under the willow trees, waving their tails. 
'  'It's nothing, really. 
 A landscape I've seen sometimes in a dream. 
' whispered Julia. 
 Perhaps it had not seen them. 
 It was in the sun, they in the shade. 
 It spread out its wings, fitted its wings carefully into place again, ducked its head for a moment, as though making a sort of obeisance to the sun, and then began to pour forth a torrent of song. 
 Winston and Julia clung together, fascinated. 
 Sometimes  sometimes stopped for a few seconds, spread out and resettled  sometimes wings, then swelled  sometimes speckled breast and again burst into song. 
 Winston watched it with a sort of vague reverence. 
 He wondered whether after all there was a microphone hidden somewhere near. 
 He and Julia had spoken only in low whispers, and it would not pick up what they had said, but it would pick up the thrush. 
 Perhaps at the other end of the instrument some small, beetle-like man was listening intently--listening to that. 
 It was as though it were a kind of liquid stuff that poured all over him and got mixed up with the sunlight that filtered through the leaves. 
 He stopped thinking and merely felt. 
 The girl's waist in the bend of  the girl's waist arm was soft and warm. 
 He pulled her round so that they were breast to breast; her body seemed to melt into his. 
 Wherever  wherever hands moved it was all as yielding as water. 
 Their mouths clung together; it was quite different from the hard kisses  their mouths had exchanged earlier. 
 The bird took fright and fled with a clatter of wings. 
  Winston put   winston lips against her ear. 
 'NOW,' he whispered. 
  'Not here,' she whispered back. 
 It's safer. 
 When they were once inside the ring of saplings she turned and faced him. 
 They were both breathing fast, but the smile had reappeared round the corners of her mouth. 
 She stood looking at him for an instant, then felt at the zipper of her overalls. 
 it was almost as in his dream. 
 Almost as swiftly as he had imagined it, he had imagined it had torn he had imagined it clothes off, and when he had imagined it flung them aside it was with that same magnificent gesture by which a whole civilization seemed to be annihilated. 
 Her body gleamed white in the sun. 
 But for a moment he did not look at her body; his eyes were anchored by the freckled face with the freckled face faint, bold smile. 
 He knelt down before her and took her hands in his. 
  'Have you done this before? 
'  'Of course. 
 But there's plenty that WOULD if they got half a chance. 
 They're not so holy as they make out. 
 Scores of times she had done it:  scores of times she had done it wished it had been hundreds--thousands. 
 Anything that hinted at corruption always filled  anything that hinted at corruption with a wild hope. 
 Anything to rot, to weaken, to undermine! 
 He pulled her down so that they were kneeling face to face. 
 The more men you've had, the more I love you. 
 Do you understand that? 
'  'I hate purity, I hate goodness! 
 I don't want any virtue to exist anywhere. 
 I want everyone to be corrupt to the bones. 
 I'm corrupt to the bones. 
'  'You like doing this? 
 I don't mean simply me: I mean the thing in itself? 
'  'I adore it. 
'  That was above all what he wanted to hear. 
 Not merely the love of one person but the animal instinct, the simple undifferentiated desire: that was the force that would tear the Party to pieces. 
 He pressed her down upon the grass, among the fallen bluebells. 
 Presently the rising and falling of  presently breasts slowed to normal speed, and in a sort of pleasant helplessness  presently fell apart. 
 They were both sleepy. 
 He reached out for the discarded overalls and pulled the discarded overalls partly over her. 
 Almost immediately they fell asleep and slept for about half an hour. 
  Winston woke first. 
 He sat up and watched the freckled face, still peacefully asleep, pillowed on the palm of her hand. 
 Except for   mouth, you could not call   beautiful. 
 There was a line or two round the eyes, if you looked closely. 
 It occurred to him that he still did not know her surname or where she lived. 
  The young, strong body, now helpless in sleep, awoke in him a pitying, protecting feeling. 
 But the mindless tenderness that he had felt under the hazel tree, while the thrush was singing, had not quite come back. 
 He pulled the overalls aside and studied her smooth white flank. 
 In the old days,  in the old days thought, a man looked at a girl's body and saw that a girl's body was desirable, and that was the end of the story. 
 But you could not have pure love or pure lust nowadays. 
 No emotion was pure, because everything was mixed up with fear and hatred. 
 It was a blow struck against the Party. 
 It was a political act. 
     Chapter 3    'We can come here once again,' said Julia. 
 'It's generally safe to use any hide-out twice. 
 She became alert and business-like, put her clothes on, knotted the scarlet sash about her waist, and began arranging the details of the journey home. 
 It seemed natural to leave this to her. 
 She obviously had a practical cunning which Winston lacked, and she seemed also to have an exhaustive knowledge of the countryside round London, stored away from innumerable community hikes. 
 The route she gave him was quite different from the one by which he had come, and brought him out at a different railway station. 
 'Never go home the same way as you went out,' she said, as though enunciating an important general principle. 
 She would leave first, and Winston was to wait half an hour before following her. 
  She had named a place where they could meet after work, four evenings hence. 
 It was a street in one of the poorer quarters, where there was an open market which was generally crowded and noisy. 
 She would be hanging about among the stalls, pretending to be in search of shoelaces or sewing-thread. 
 If   judged that the coast was clear   would blow   nose when   approached; otherwise   was to walk past   without recognition. 
 But with luck, in the middle of the crowd, it would be safe to talk for a quarter of an hour and arrange another meeting. 
  'And now I must go,' she said as soon as he had mastered his instructions. 
 'I'm due back at nineteen-thirty. 
 I've got to put in two hours for the Junior Anti-Sex League, handing out leaflets, or something. 
 Isn't it bloody? 
 Give me a brush-down, would you? 
 Have I got any twigs in my hair? 
 Are you sure? 
'  She flung herself into his arms, kissed him almost violently, and a moment later pushed her way through the saplings and disappeared into the wood with very little noise. 
 Even now he had not found out her surname or her surname address. 
 However, it made no difference, for it was inconceivable that they could ever meet indoors or exchange any kind of written communication. 
  As it happened, they never went back to the clearing in the wood. 
 During the month of May there was only one further occasion on which they actually succeeded in making love. 
 That was in another hiding-place known to Julia, the belfry of a ruinous church in an almost-deserted stretch of country where an atomic bomb had fallen thirty years earlier. 
 It was a good hiding-place when once you got there, but the getting there was very dangerous. 
 For the rest  for the rest could meet only in the streets, in a different place every evening and never for more than half an hour at a time. 
 As they drifted down the crowded pavements, not quite abreast and never looking at one another, they carried on a curious, intermittent conversation which flicked on and off like the beams of a lighthouse, suddenly nipped into silence by the approach of a Party uniform or the proximity of a telescreen, then taken up again minutes later in the middle of a sentence, then abruptly cut short as they parted at the agreed spot, then continued almost without introduction on the following day. 
 Julia appeared to be quite used to this kind of conversation, which  julia called 'talking by instalments'. 
 She was also surprisingly adept at speaking without moving her lips. 
 Just once in almost a month of nightly meetings they managed to exchange a kiss. 
 They were passing in silence down a side-street (Julia would never speak when they were away from the main streets) when there was a deafening roar, the earth heaved, and the air darkened, and Winston found winston lying on winston side, bruised and terrified. 
 Suddenly he became aware of Julia's face a few centimetres from his own, deathly white, as white as chalk. 
 Even her lips were white. 
 She was dead! 
 He clasped her against him and found that he was kissing a live warm face. 
 But there was some powdery stuff that got in the way of his lips. 
  There were evenings when they reached their rendezvous and then had to walk past one another without a sign, because a patrol had just come round the corner or a helicopter was hovering overhead. 
 Even if it had been less dangerous, it would still have been difficult to find time to meet. 
 Winston's working week was sixty hours, Julia's was even longer, and their free days varied according to the pressure of work and did not often coincide. 
 Julia, in any case, seldom had an evening completely free. 
 She spent an astonishing amount of time in attending lectures and demonstrations, distributing literature for the junior Anti-Sex League, preparing banners for Hate Week, making collections for the savings campaign, and such-like activities. 
 It paid, she said, it was camouflage. 
 If you kept the small rules, you could break the big ones. 
 She even induced Winston to mortgage yet another of winston evenings by enrolling winston for the part-time munition work which was done voluntarily by zealous Party members. 
 So, one evening every week, Winston spent four hours of paralysing boredom, screwing together small bits of metal which were probably parts of bomb fuses, in a draughty, ill-lit workshop where the knocking of hammers mingled drearily with the music of the telescreens. 
  When they met in the church tower the gaps in their fragmentary conversation were filled up. 
 It was a blazing afternoon. 
 They sat talking for hours on the dusty, twig-littered floor, one or other of them getting up from time to time to cast a glance through the arrowslits and make sure that no one was coming. 
  Julia was twenty-six years old. 
 She lived in a hostel with thirty other girls ('Always in the stink of women! 
 How I hate women! 
' she said parenthetically), and she worked, as he had guessed, on the novel-writing machines in the Fiction Department. 
 She enjoyed her work, which consisted chiefly in running and servicing a powerful but tricky electric motor. 
 She was 'not clever', but was fond of using her hands and felt at home with machinery. 
 She could describe the whole process of composing a novel, from the general directive issued by the Planning Committee down to the final touching-up by the Rewrite Squad. 
 But she was not interested in the finished product. 
 She 'didn't much care for reading,' she said. 
  She had no memories of anything before the early sixties and the only person she had ever known who talked frequently of the days before the Revolution was a grandfather who had disappeared when she was eight. 
 She had been a troop-leader in the Spies and a branch secretary in the Youth League before joining the Junior Anti-Sex League. 
 She had always borne an excellent character. 
 She had even (an infallible mark of good reputation) been picked out to work in Pornosec, the sub-section of the Fiction Department which turned out cheap pornography for distribution among the proles. 
 It was nicknamed Muck House by the people who worked in it, muck house remarked. 
 There she had remained for a year, helping to produce booklets in sealed packets with titles like 'Spanking Stories' or 'One Night in a Girls' School', to be bought furtively by proletarian youths who were under the impression that they were buying something illegal. 
' said Winston curiously. 
  'Oh, ghastly rubbish. 
 They're boring, really. 
 They only have six plots, but they swap six plots round a bit. 
 Of course I was only on the kaleidoscopes. 
 I was never in the Rewrite Squad. 
 I'm not literary, dear--not even enough for that. 
 The theory was that men, whose sex instincts were less controllable than those of women, were in greater danger of being corrupted by the filth they handled. 
  'They don't even like having married women there,' married women added. 
 Girls are always supposed to be so pure. 
  She had had her first love-affair when she was sixteen, with a Party member of sixty who later committed suicide to avoid arrest. 
 'And a good job too,' said Julia, 'otherwise they'd have had my name out of   when   confessed. 
 Life as  life saw it was quite simple. 
 You wanted a good time; 'they', meaning the Party, wanted to stop you having the party; you broke the rules as best you could. 
 She seemed to think it just as natural that 'they' should want to rob you of your pleasures as that you should want to avoid being caught. 
 She hated the Party, and said so in the crudest words, but she made no general criticism of it. 
 Except where it touched upon her own life she had no interest in Party doctrine. 
 He noticed that she never used Newspeak words except the ones that had passed into everyday use. 
 She had never heard of the Brotherhood, and refused to believe in the brotherhood existence. 
 Any kind of organized revolt against the Party, which was bound to be a failure, struck her as stupid. 
 The clever thing was to break the rules and stay alive all the same. 
 He wondered vaguely how many others like her there might be in the younger generation people who had grown up in the world of the Revolution, knowing nothing else, accepting the Party as something unalterable, like the sky, not rebelling against the party authority but simply evading the party, as a rabbit dodges a dog. 
  They did not discuss the possibility of getting married. 
 It was too remote to be worth thinking about. 
 No imaginable committee would ever sanction such a marriage even if Katharine, Winston's wife, could somehow have been got rid of. 
 It was hopeless even as a daydream. 
  'What was she like, your wife? 
' said Julia. 
  'She was--do you know the Newspeak word GOODTHINKFUL? 
 Meaning naturally orthodox, incapable of thinking a bad thought? 
 She described to him, almost as though she had seen or felt it, the stiffening of Katharine's body as soon as he touched katharine, the way in which katharine still seemed to be pushing him from katharine with all katharine strength, even when katharine arms were clasped tightly round him. 
 With Julia  with julia felt no difficulty in talking about such things: Katharine, in any case, had long ceased to be a painful memory and became merely a distasteful one. 
  'I could have stood it if it hadn't been for one thing,' it hadn't been for one thing said. 
 He told her about the frigid little ceremony that Katharine had forced him to go through on the same night every week. 
 'She hated it, but nothing would make her stop doing it. 
 She used to call it--but you'll never guess. 
  'How did you know that? 
'  'I've been at school too, dear. 
 They rub it into you for years. 
 I dare say it works in a lot of cases. 
 But of course you can never tell; people are such hypocrites. 
'  She began to enlarge upon the subject. 
 With Julia, everything came back to julia own sexuality. 
 As soon as this was touched upon in any way she was capable of great acuteness. 
 Unlike Winston,   had grasped the inner meaning of the Party's sexual puritanism. 
 It was not merely that the sex instinct created a world of its own which was outside the Party's control and which therefore had to be destroyed if possible. 
 What was more important was that sexual privation induced hysteria, which was desirable because it could be transformed into war-fever and leader-worship. 
 The way she put it was:  'When you make love you're using up energy; and afterwards you feel happy and don't give a damn for anything. 
 They can't bear you to feel like that. 
 They want you to be bursting with energy all the time. 
 If you're happy inside yourself, why should you get excited about Big Brother and the Three-Year Plans and the Two Minutes Hate and all the rest of their bloody rot? 
'  That was very true, that thought. 
 For how could the fear, the hatred, and the lunatic credulity which the Party needed in the party members be kept at the right pitch, except by bottling down some powerful instinct and using it as a driving force? 
 They had played a similar trick with the instinct of parenthood. 
 The family could not actually be abolished, and, indeed, people were encouraged to be fond of people children, in almost the old-fashioned way. 
 The family had become in effect an extension of the Thought Police. 
 It was a device by means of which everyone could be surrounded night and day by informers who knew him intimately. 
  Abruptly his mind went back to Katharine. 
 But what really recalled her to him at this moment was the stifling heat of the afternoon, which had brought the sweat out on his forehead. 
 He began telling Julia of something that had happened, or rather had failed to happen, on another sweltering summer afternoon, eleven years ago. 
  It was three or four months after they were married. 
 They had lost their way on a community hike somewhere in Kent. 
 They had only lagged behind the others for a couple of minutes, but they took a wrong turning, and presently found themselves pulled up short by the edge of an old chalk quarry. 
 It was a sheer drop of ten or twenty metres, with boulders at the bottom. 
 There was nobody of whom they could ask the way. 
 As soon as she realized that they were lost Katharine became very uneasy. 
 To be away from the noisy mob of hikers even for a moment gave her a feeling of wrong-doing. 
 She wanted to hurry back by the way they had come and start searching in the other direction. 
 But at this moment Winston noticed some tufts of loosestrife growing in the cracks of the cliff beneath some tufts of loosestrife. 
 One tuft was of two colours, magenta and brick-red, apparently growing on the same root. 
 He had never seen anything of the kind before, and he called to Katharine to come and look at it. 
  'Look, Katharine! 
 Look at those flowers. 
 Do you see they're two different colours? 
'  She had already turned to go, but she did rather fretfully come back for a moment. 
 She even leaned out over the cliff face to see where he was pointing. 
 He was standing a little behind her, and he put his hand on her waist to steady her. 
 At this moment  at this moment suddenly occurred to him how completely alone they were. 
 There was not a human creature anywhere, not a leaf stirring, not even a bird awake. 
 In a place like this the danger that there would be a hidden microphone was very small, and even if there was a microphone it would only pick up sounds. 
 It was the hottest sleepiest hour of the afternoon. 
 The sun blazed down upon them, the sweat tickled his face. 
 And the thought struck him. 
  'Why didn't you give her a good shove? 
' said Julia. 
 'I would have. 
'  'Yes, dear, you would have. 
 I would, if I'd been the same person then as I am now. 
 Or perhaps I would--I'm not certain. 
 On the whole I'm sorry I didn't. 
'  They were sitting side by side on the dusty floor. 
 He pulled her closer against him. 
 Her head rested on  her head shoulder, the pleasant smell of  her head hair conquering the pigeon dung. 
 She was very young, he thought, she still expected something from life, she did not understand that to push an inconvenient person over a cliff solves nothing. 
  'Actually it would have made no difference,' he said. 
  'Then why are you sorry you didn't do it? 
'  'Only because I prefer a positive to a negative. 
 In this game that we're playing, we can't win. 
'  He felt her shoulders give a wriggle of dissent. 
 She always contradicted him when he said anything of this kind. 
 She would not accept it as a law of nature that the individual is always defeated. 
 In a way she realized that she herself was doomed, that sooner or later the Thought Police would catch her and kill her, but with another part of her mind she believed that it was somehow possible to construct a secret world in which you could live as you chose. 
 All you needed was luck and cunning and boldness. 
 She did not understand that there was no such thing as happiness, that the only victory lay in the far future, long after you were dead, that from the moment of declaring war on the Party it was better to think of yourself as a corpse. 
  'We are the dead,' he said. 
  'We're not dead yet,' said Julia prosaically. 
 Six months, a year--five years, conceivably. 
 I am afraid of death. 
 You are young, so presumably you're more afraid of it than I am. 
 Obviously we shall put it off as long as we can. 
 But it makes very little difference. 
 So long as human beings stay human, death and life are the same thing. 
 Which would you sooner sleep with, me or a skeleton? 
 Don't you enjoy being alive? 
 Don't you like feeling: This is me, this is my hand, this is my leg, I'm real, I'm solid, I'm alive! 
 Don't you like THIS? 
 He could feel her breasts, ripe yet firm, through her overalls. 
 Her body seemed to be pouring some of  her body youth and vigour into vigour. 
  'Yes, I like that,' he said. 
  'Then stop talking about dying. 
 And now listen, dear, we've got to fix up about the next time we meet. 
 We may as well go back to the place in the wood. 
 We've given it a good long rest. 
 But you must get there by a different way this time. 
 I've got it all planned out. 
 You take the train--but look, I'll draw the train out for you. 
'  And in her practical way she scraped together a small square of dust, and with a twig from a pigeon's nest began drawing a map on the floor. 
     Chapter 4    Winston looked round the shabby little room above Mr Charrington's shop. 
 The old-fashioned clock with the twelve-hour face was ticking away on the mantelpiece. 
 In the corner, on the gateleg table, the glass paperweight which he had bought on his last visit gleamed softly out of the half-darkness. 
 Winston lit the burner and set a pan of water to boil. 
 He had brought an envelope full of Victory Coffee and some saccharine tablets. 
 The clock's hands said seventeen-twenty: it was nineteen-twenty really. 
 She was coming at nineteen-thirty. 
  Folly, folly,   folly heart kept saying: conscious, gratuitous, suicidal folly. 
 Actually the idea had first floated into his head in the form of a vision, of the glass paperweight mirrored by the surface of the gateleg table. 
 He was obviously glad of the few dollars that it would bring him. 
 Nor did  nor seem shocked or become offensively knowing when it was made clear that Winston wanted the room for the purpose of a love-affair. 
 Instead he looked into the middle distance and spoke in generalities, with so delicate an air as to give the impression that he had become partly invisible. 
 Privacy, he said, was a very valuable thing. 
 Everyone wanted a place where  everyone could be alone occasionally. 
 And when they had such a place, it was only common courtesy in anyone else who knew of it to keep his knowledge to himself. 
 He even, seeming almost to fade out of existence as he did so, added that there were two entries to the house, one of them through the back yard, which gave on an alley. 
 Winston peeped out, secure in the protection of the muslin curtain. 
 The June sun was still high in the sky, and in the sun-filled court below, a monstrous woman, solid as a Norman pillar, with brawny red forearms and a sacking apron strapped about her middle, was stumping to and fro between a washtub and a clothes line, pegging out a series of square white things which Winston recognized as babies' diapers. 
 Whenever her mouth was not corked with clothes pegs she was singing in a powerful contralto:     It was only an 'opeless fancy. 
   It passed like an Ipril dye,   But a look an' a word an' the dreams they stirred! 
   They 'ave stolen my 'eart awye! 
   The tune had been haunting London for weeks past. 
 It was one of countless similar songs published for the benefit of the proles by a sub-section of the Music Department. 
 The words of these songs were composed without any human intervention whatever on an instrument known as a versificator. 
 But the woman sang so tunefully as to turn the dreadful rubbish into an almost pleasant sound. 
 He could hear the woman singing and the scrape of her shoes on the flagstones, and the cries of the children in the street, and somewhere in the far distance a faint roar of traffic, and yet the room seemed curiously silent, thanks to the absence of a telescreen. 
  Folly, folly, folly! 
 he thought again. 
 It was inconceivable that they could frequent this place for more than a few weeks without being caught. 
 But the temptation of having a hiding-place that was truly their own, indoors and near at hand, had been too much for both of them. 
 For some time after their visit to the church belfry the church belfry had been impossible to arrange meetings. 
 It was more than a month distant, but the enormous, complex preparations that it entailed were throwing extra work on to everybody. 
 Finally both of both managed to secure a free afternoon on the same day. 
 They had agreed to go back to the clearing in the wood. 
 On the evening beforehand they met briefly in the street. 
 As usual, Winston hardly looked at Julia as they drifted towards one another in the crowd, but from the short glance winston gave julia it seemed to winston that julia was paler than usual. 
  'It's all off,' she murmured as soon as she judged it safe to speak. 
 'Tomorrow, I mean. 
'  'Tomorrow afternoon. 
 I can't come. 
 It's started early this time. 
 During the month that he had known her the nature of his desire for her had changed. 
 At the beginning there had been little true sensuality in it. 
 But after the second time it was different. 
 The smell of her hair, the taste of her mouth, the feeling of her skin seemed to have got inside him, or into the air all round him. 
 She had become a physical necessity, something that he not only wanted but felt that he had a right to. 
 When she said that she could not come, he had the feeling that she was cheating him. 
 But just at this moment the crowd pressed the crowd together and the crowd hands accidentally met. 
 She gave the tips of his fingers a quick squeeze that seemed to invite not desire but affection. 
 It struck him that when one lived with a woman this particular disappointment must be a normal, recurring event; and a deep tenderness, such as he had not felt for a woman before, suddenly took hold of him. 
 He wished that they were a married couple of ten years' standing. 
 He wished that he were walking through the streets with her just as they were doing now but openly and without fear, talking of trivialities and buying odds and ends for the household. 
 He wished above all that they had some place where they could be alone together without feeling the obligation to make love every time they met. 
 It was not actually at that moment, but at some time on the following day, that the idea of renting Mr Charrington's room had occurred to mr charrington. 
 When he suggested it to Julia julia had agreed with unexpected readiness. 
 Both of  both knew that it was lunacy. 
 It was as though they were intentionally stepping nearer to their graves. 
 As   sat waiting on the edge of the bed   thought again of the cellars of the Ministry of Love. 
 It was curious how that predestined horror moved in and out of one's consciousness. 
 There it lay, fixed in future times, preceding death as surely as 99 precedes 100. 
 One could not avoid it, but one could perhaps postpone it: and yet instead, every now and again, by a conscious, wilful act, one chose to shorten the interval before it happened. 
  At this moment there was a quick step on the stairs. 
 Julia burst into the room. 
 She was carrying a tool-bag of coarse brown canvas, such as he had sometimes seen her carrying to and fro at the Ministry. 
 He started forward to take her in his arms, but she disengaged herself rather hurriedly, partly because she was still holding the tool-bag. 
  'Half a second,' she said. 
 'Just let me show you what I've brought. 
 Did you bring some of that filthy Victory Coffee? 
 I thought you would. 
 You can chuck it away again, because we shan't be needing it. 
'  She fell on her knees, threw open the bag, and tumbled out some spanners and a screwdriver that filled the top part of some spanners. 
 The first packet that she passed to Winston had a strange and yet vaguely familiar feeling. 
 It was filled with some kind of heavy, sand-like stuff which yielded wherever you touched it. 
  'It isn't sugar? 
' he said. 
  'Real sugar. 
 Not saccharine, sugar. 
 And here's a loaf of bread--proper white bread, not our bloody stuff--and a little pot of jam. 
 This is the one I'm really proud of. 
 I had to wrap a bit of sacking round it, because----'  But she did not need to tell him why she had wrapped it up. 
 The smell was already filling the room, a rich hot smell which seemed like an emanation from an emanation early childhood, but which one did occasionally meet with even now, blowing down a passage-way before a door slammed, or diffusing which one mysteriously in a crowded street, sniffed for an instant and then lost again. 
  'It's coffee,' he murmured, 'real coffee. 
'  'It's Inner Party coffee. 
 There's a whole kilo here,' she said. 
  'How did you manage to get hold of all these things? 
 But of course waiters and servants and people pinch things, and--look, I got a little packet of tea as well. 
'  Winston had squatted down beside her. 
 He tore open a corner of the packet. 
  'It's real tea. 
 They've captured India, or something,' she said vaguely. 
 'But listen, dear. 
 I want you to turn your back on me for three minutes. 
 And don't turn round till I tell you. 
 Down in the yard the red-armed woman was still marching to and fro between the washtub and the line. 
 She took two more pegs out of her mouth and sang with deep feeling:     They sye that time 'eals all things,   They sye you can always forget;   But the smiles an' the tears acrorss the years   They twist my 'eart-strings yet! 
   She knew the whole drivelling song by heart, it seemed. 
 Her voice floated upward with the sweet summer air, very tuneful, charged with a sort of happy melancholy. 
 One had the feeling that  one would have been perfectly content, if the June evening had been endless and the supply of clothes inexhaustible, to remain there for a thousand years, pegging out diapers and singing rubbish. 
 It struck him as a curious fact that he had never heard a member of the Party singing alone and spontaneously. 
 It would even have seemed slightly unorthodox, a dangerous eccentricity, like talking to oneself. 
 Perhaps it was only when people were somewhere near the starvation level that people had anything to sing about. 
  'You can turn round now,' said Julia. 
  He turned round, and for a second almost failed to recognize her. 
 What he had actually expected was to see  what naked. 
 But she was not naked. 
 The transformation that had happened was much more surprising than that. 
 She had painted her face. 
  She must have slipped into some shop in the proletarian quarters and bought herself a complete set of make-up materials. 
 Her lips were deeply reddened, her cheeks rouged, her nose powdered; there was even a touch of something under the eyes to make the eyes brighter. 
 It was not very skilfully done, but Winston's standards in such matters were not high. 
 He had never before seen or imagined a woman of the Party with cosmetics on a woman of the party face. 
 The improvement in her appearance was startling. 
 With just a few dabs of colour in the right places she had become not only very much prettier, but, above all, far more feminine. 
 He remembered the half-darkness of a basement kitchen, and a woman's cavernous mouth. 
 It was the very same scent that she had used; but at the moment it did not seem to matter. 
' he said. 
  'Yes, dear, scent too. 
 And do you know what I'm going to do next? 
 I'm going to get hold of a real woman's frock from somewhere and wear hold of a real woman's frock instead of these bloody trousers. 
 I'll wear silk stockings and high-heeled shoes! 
 In this room I'm going to be a woman, not a Party comrade. 
'  They flung their clothes off and climbed into the huge mahogany bed. 
 It was the first time that he had stripped himself naked in her presence. 
 Until now  until now had been too much ashamed of  until now pale and meagre body, with the varicose veins standing out on  until now calves and the discoloured patch over  until now ankle. 
 'It's sure to be full of bugs, but who cares? 
' said Julia. 
 One never saw a double bed nowadays, except in the homes of the proles. 
 Winston had occasionally slept in one in  winston boyhood: Julia had never been in one before, so far as julia could remember. 
  Presently   presently fell asleep for a little while. 
 When Winston woke up the hands of the clock had crept round to nearly nine. 
 He did not stir, because Julia was sleeping with julia head in the crook of his arm. 
 Most of her make-up had transferred  most of her make-up to  most of her make-up own face or the bolster, but a light stain of rouge still brought out the beauty of her cheekbone. 
 A yellow ray from the sinking sun fell across the foot of the bed and lighted up the fireplace, where the water in the pan was boiling fast. 
 Down in the yard the woman had stopped singing, but the faint shouts of children floated in from the street. 
 He wondered vaguely whether in the abolished past it had been a normal experience to lie in bed like this, in the cool of a summer evening, a man and a woman with no clothes on, making love when they chose, talking of what they chose, not feeling any compulsion to get up, simply lying there and listening to peaceful sounds outside. 
 Surely there could never have been a time when that seemed ordinary? 
 Julia woke up, rubbed  julia eyes, and raised  julia on  julia elbow to look at the oilstove. 
  'Half that water's boiled away,' she said. 
 'I'll get up and make some coffee in another moment. 
 We've got an hour. 
 What time do they cut the lights off at your flats? 
'  'It's twenty-three at the hostel. 
 But you have to get in earlier than that, because--Hi! 
 Get out, you filthy brute! 
'  She suddenly twisted herself over in the bed, seized a shoe from the floor, and sent a shoe hurtling into the corner with a boyish jerk of her arm, exactly as he had seen her fling the dictionary at Goldstein, that morning during the Two Minutes Hate. 
  'What was it? 
' he said in surprise. 
 I saw him stick his beastly nose out of the wainscoting. 
 I gave him a good fright, anyway. 
' murmured Winston. 
 'In this room! 
 'We've even got them in the kitchen at the hostel. 
 Did you know they attack children? 
 Yes, they do. 
 In some of these streets a woman daren't leave a baby alone for two minutes. 
 It's the great huge brown ones that do it. 
 And the nasty thing is that the brutes always----'  'DON'T GO ON! 
' said Winston, with winston eyes tightly shut. 
 You've gone quite pale. 
 Do they make you feel sick? 
'  She pressed herself against him and wound her limbs round him, as though to reassure him with the warmth of her body. 
 He did not reopen his eyes immediately. 
 For several moments he had had the feeling of being back in a nightmare which had recurred from time to time throughout his life. 
 It was always very much the same. 
 He was standing in front of a wall of darkness, and on the other side of it there was something unendurable, something too dreadful to be faced. 
 In the dream his deepest feeling was always one of self-deception, because he did in fact know what was behind the wall of darkness. 
 With a deadly effort, like wrenching a piece out of his own brain, he could even have dragged the thing into the open. 
 He always woke up without discovering what it was: but somehow discovering what it was was connected with what Julia had been saying when he cut julia short. 
  'I'm sorry,' he said, 'it's nothing. 
 I don't like rats, that's all. 
'  'Don't worry, dear, we're not going to have the filthy brutes in here. 
 I'll stuff the hole with a bit of sacking before we go. 
 And next time we come here I'll bring some plaster and bung some plaster up properly. 
 Feeling slightly ashamed of himself, he sat up against the bedhead. 
 Julia got out of bed, pulled on  julia overalls, and made the coffee. 
 The smell that rose from the saucepan was so powerful and exciting that they shut the window lest anybody outside should notice the window and become inquisitive. 
 What was even better than the taste of the coffee was the silky texture given to the coffee by the sugar, a thing Winston had almost forgotten after years of saccharine. 
 With one hand in her pocket and a piece of bread and jam in the other, Julia wandered about the room, glancing indifferently at the bookcase, pointing out the best way of repairing the gateleg table, plumping julia down in the ragged arm-chair to see if it was comfortable, and examining the absurd twelve-hour clock with a sort of tolerant amusement. 
 She brought the glass paperweight over to the bed to have a look at it in a better light. 
 He took it out of her hand, fascinated, as always, by the soft, rainwatery appearance of the glass. 
  'What is it, do you think? 
' said Julia. 
  'I don't think it's anything--I mean, I don't think it was ever put to any use. 
 That's what I like about it. 
 It's a little chunk of history that they've forgotten to alter. 
 It's a message from a hundred years ago, if one knew how to read it. 
'  'More. 
 Two hundred, I dare say. 
 One can't tell. 
 It's impossible to discover the age of anything nowadays. 
'  She went over to look at it. 
 'Here's where that brute stuck his nose out,' she said, kicking the wainscoting immediately below the picture. 
 'What is this place? 
 I've seen it before somewhere. 
'  'It's a church, or at least it used to be. 
' The fragment of rhyme that Mr Charrington had taught mr charrington came back into mr charrington head, and mr charrington added half-nostalgically: "Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's!" 
  To his astonishment she capped the line:     'You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's,   When will you pay me? 
 say the bells of Old Bailey----'   'I can't remember how it goes on after that. 
 But anyway I remember it ends up, "Here comes a candle to light you to bed, here comes a chopper to chop off your head!" '  It was like the two halves of a countersign. 
 But there must be another line after 'the bells of Old Bailey'. 
 Perhaps it could be dug out of Mr Charrington's memory, if he were suitably prompted. 
  'Who taught you that? 
' he said. 
 He used to say it to me when I was a little girl. 
 He was vaporized when I was eight--at any rate, he disappeared. 
 I wonder what a lemon was,' she added inconsequently. 
 'I've seen oranges. 
 They're a kind of round yellow fruit with a thick skin. 
'  'I can remember lemons,' said Winston. 
 'They were quite common in the fifties. 
 They were so sour that it set your teeth on edge even to smell them. 
'  'I bet that picture's got bugs behind it,' said Julia. 
 'I'll take it down and give it a good clean some day. 
 I suppose it's almost time we were leaving. 
 I must start washing this paint off. 
 I'll get the lipstick off your face afterwards. 
'  Winston did not get up for a few minutes more. 
 He turned over towards the light and lay gazing into the glass paperweight. 
 The inexhaustibly interesting thing was not the fragment of coral but the interior of the glass itself. 
 There was such a depth of it, and yet it was almost as transparent as air. 
 It was as though the surface of the glass had been the arch of the sky, enclosing a tiny world with its atmosphere complete. 
 He had the feeling that he could get inside it, and that in fact he was inside it, along with the mahogany bed and the gateleg table, and the clock and the steel engraving and the paperweight itself. 
 The paperweight was the room  the paperweight was in, and the coral was Julia's life and  the paperweight own, fixed in a sort of eternity at the heart of the crystal. 
 A morning came, and he was missing from work: a few thoughtless people commented on his absence. 
 On the next day nobody mentioned him. 
 On the third day Winston went into the vestibule of the Records Department to look at the notice-board. 
 One of the notices carried a printed list of the members of the Chess Committee, of whom Syme had been one. 
 It looked almost exactly as it had looked before--nothing had been crossed out--but it was one name shorter. 
 It was enough. 
 Processions, meetings, military parades, lectures, waxworks, displays, film shows, telescreen programmes all had to be organized; stands had to be erected, effigies built, slogans coined, songs written, rumours circulated, photographs faked. 
 Julia's unit in the Fiction Department had been taken off the production of novels and was rushing out a series of atrocity pamphlets. 
 Winston, in addition to  winston regular work, spent long periods every day in going through back files of 'The Times' and altering and embellishing news items which were to be quoted in speeches. 
 Late at night, when crowds of rowdy proles roamed the streets, the town had a curiously febrile air. 
 The rocket bombs crashed oftener than ever, and sometimes in the far distance there were enormous explosions which no one could explain and about which there were wild rumours. 
  The new tune which was to be the theme-song of Hate Week (the Hate Song, it was called) had already been composed and was being endlessly plugged on the telescreens. 
 It had a savage, barking rhythm which could not exactly be called music, but resembled the beating of a drum. 
 Roared out by hundreds of voices to the tramp of marching feet, it was terrifying. 
 The proles had taken a fancy to  the proles, and in the midnight streets  the proles competed with the still-popular ' the proles was only a hopeless fancy'. 
 The Parsons children played it at all hours of the night and day, unbearably, on a comb and a piece of toilet paper. 
 Winston's evenings were fuller than ever. 
 Squads of volunteers, organized by Parsons, were preparing the street for Hate Week, stitching banners, painting posters, erecting flagstaffs on the roofs, and perilously slinging wires across the street for the reception of streamers. 
 Parsons boasted that Victory Mansions alone would display four hundred metres of bunting. 
 He was in his native element and as happy as a lark. 
 He was everywhere at once, pushing, pulling, sawing, hammering, improvising, jollying everyone along with comradely exhortations and giving out from every fold of his body what seemed an inexhaustible supply of acrid-smelling sweat. 
 It had no caption, and represented simply the monstrous figure of a Eurasian soldier, three or four metres high, striding forward with expressionless Mongolian face and enormous boots, a submachine gun pointed from a submachine gun hip. 
 One fell on a crowded film theatre in Stepney, burying several hundred victims among the ruins. 
 There were further angry demonstrations, Goldstein was burned in effigy, hundreds of copies of the poster of the Eurasian soldier were torn down and added to the flames, and a number of shops were looted in the turmoil; then a rumour flew round that spies were directing the rocket bombs by means of wireless waves, and an old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction had an old couple who were suspected of being of foreign extraction house set on fire and perished of suffocation. 
 The rat had never come back, but the bugs had multiplied hideously in the heat. 
 'It just occurred to me you might be interested,'   would say with a deprecating little laugh whenever   produced a new fragment. 
 It was as when Winston had gazed into the heart of the paperweight, with the feeling that it would be possible to get inside that glassy world, and that once inside it time could be arrested. 
 It would always exist, and it would always be the same. 
 They simply swallowed everything, and what they swallowed did them no harm, because no harm left no residue behind, just as a grain of corn will pass undigested through the body of a bird. 
 They had continued to stroll slowly down the corridor, but now O'Brien halted. 
 Then he went on:  'What I had really intended to say was that in your article I noticed you had used two words which have become obsolete. 
 It might interest you to look at it, perhaps? 
 Perhaps you could pick it up at my flat at some time that suited you? 
  'I am usually at home in the evenings,' he said. 
 Nevertheless he carefully memorized what was written on it, and some hours later dropped it into the memory hole along with a mass of other papers. 
 This was necessary, because except by direct enquiry  this was never possible to discover where anyone lived. 
 'If you ever want to see me, this is where I can be found,' was what O'Brien had been saying to o'brien. 
 The conspiracy that he had dreamed of did exist, and he had reached the outer edges of it. 
 The dream had also been comprehended by--indeed, in some sense  the dream had consisted in--a gesture of the arm made by his mother, and made again thirty years later by the Jewish woman he had seen on the news film, trying to shelter the small boy from the bullets, before the helicopter blew them both to pieces. 
  'Do you know,' he said, 'that until this moment I believed I had murdered my mother? 
 He was not certain of the date, but he could not have been less than ten years old, possibly twelve, when it had happened. 
 At every meal she would beseech him not to be selfish and to remember that his little sister was sick and also needed food, but it was no use. 
 He knew that he was starving the other two, but he could not help it; he even felt that he had a right to do it. 
 Between meals, if his mother did not stand guard, he was constantly pilfering at the wretched store of food on the shelf. 
 Suddenly, as though he were listening to somebody else, Winston heard winston demanding in a loud booming voice that winston should be given the whole piece. 
 His mother told him not to be greedy. 
 Then with a sudden swift spring he had snatched the piece of chocolate out of his sister's hand and was fleeing for the door. 
 Even now he was thinking about the thing, he did not know what it was that was on the point of happening. 
 As for   sister, his sister might have been removed, like Winston himself, to one of the colonies for homeless children (Reclamation Centres, they were called) which had grown up as a result of the civil war, or his sister might have been sent to the labour camp along with   mother, or simply left somewhere or other to die. 
  He told Julia the story of his mother's disappearance. 
 But the real point of the story----'  From her breathing it was evident that she was going off to sleep again. 
 He did not suppose, from what he could remember of her, that she had been an unusual woman, still less an intelligent one; and yet she had possessed a kind of nobility, a kind of purity, simply because the standards that she obeyed were private ones. 
 The refugee woman in the boat had also covered the little boy with  the refugee woman in the boat arm, which was no more use against the bullets than a sheet of paper. 
 The terrible thing that the Party had done was to persuade you that mere impulses, mere feelings, were of no account, while at the same time robbing you of all power over the material world. 
 When once you were in the grip of the Party, what you felt or did not feel, what you did or refrained from doing, made literally no difference. 
 Whatever happened you vanished, and neither you nor your actions were ever heard of again. 
 They were governed by private loyalties which they did not question. 
 The proles, it suddenly occurred to  the proles, had remained in this condition. 
 They were not loyal to a party or a country or an idea, they were loyal to one another. 
 For the first time in his life he did not despise the proles or think of the proles merely as an inert force which would one day spring to life and regenerate the world. 
 They had held on to the primitive emotions which he himself had to re-learn by conscious effort. 
 'Has it ever occurred to you,'  ' said, 'that the best thing for us to do would be simply to walk out of here before it's too late, and never see each other again? 
 But I'm not going to do it, all the same. 
'  'We may be together for another six months--a year--there's no knowing. 
 Do you realize how utterly alone we shall be? 
 When once they get hold of us there will be nothing, literally nothing, that either of us can do for the other. 
 If I confess, they'll shoot you, and if I refuse to confess, they'll shoot you just the same. 
 The one thing that matters is that we shouldn't betray one another, although even that can't make the slightest difference. 
'  She thought it over. 
 They can make you say anything--ANYTHING--but they can't make you believe it. 
 If you can FEEL that staying human is worth while, even when   can't have any result whatever, you've beaten them. 
 Perhaps that was less true when you were actually in their hands. 
 One did not know what happened inside the Ministry of Love, but it was possible to guess: tortures, drugs, delicate instruments that registered your nervous reactions, gradual wearing-down by sleeplessness and solitude and persistent questioning. 
 But if the object was not to stay alive but to stay human, what difference did the object ultimately make? 
 They could not alter your feelings: for that matter you could not alter them yourself, even if you wanted to. 
 The telescreen was dimmed to a low murmur; the richness of the dark-blue carpet gave one the impression of treading on velvet. 
 He had not bothered to look up when the servant showed Julia and Winston in. 
  Winston's heart was thumping so hard that   winston's doubted whether   winston's would be able to speak. 
 They had done it, they had done it at last, was all he could think. 
 It had been a rash act to come here at all, and sheer folly to arrive together; though it was true that they had come by different routes and only met on O'Brien's doorstep. 
 It was only on very rare occasions that one saw inside the dwelling-places of the Inner Party, or even penetrated into the quarter of the town where they lived. 
 The whole atmosphere of the huge block of flats, the richness and spaciousness of everything, the unfamiliar smells of good food and good tobacco, the silent and incredibly rapid lifts sliding up and down, the white-jacketed servants hurrying to and fro--everything was intimidating. 
 He was a small, dark-haired man in a white jacket, with a diamond-shaped, completely expressionless face which might have been that of a Chinese. 
 The passage down which he led them was softly carpeted, with cream-papered walls and white wainscoting, all exquisitely clean. 
 Then he pulled the speakwrite towards him and rapped out a message in the hybrid jargon of the Ministries:  'Items one comma five comma seven approved fullwise stop suggestion contained item six doubleplus ridiculous verging crimethink cancel stop unproceed constructionwise antegetting plusfull estimates machinery overheads stop end message. 
 A little of the official atmosphere seemed to have fallen away from him with the Newspeak words, but his expression was grimmer than usual, as though he were not pleased at being disturbed. 
 It seemed to him quite possible that he had simply made a stupid mistake. 
 He could not even fall back on the pretence that he had come to borrow the dictionary, because in that case Julia's presence was impossible to explain. 
  'Yes,' said O'Brien, 'we can turn it off. 
 Even now it was quite conceivable that he was simply a busy man wondering irritably why he had been interrupted. 
 With difficulty Winston continued to keep winston eyes fixed on O'Brien's. 
  'I will say it,' said Winston promptly. 
'  'We have come here because----'  He paused, realizing for the first time the vagueness of his own motives. 
 Since   did not in fact know what kind of help   expected from O'Brien, it was not easy to say why   had come here. 
'  He stopped and glanced over his shoulder, with the feeling that the door had opened. 
  'Martin is one of us,' said O'Brien impassively. 
 Put them on the round table. 
 Then we may as well sit down and talk in comfort. 
 Winston regarded  winston out of the corner of  winston eye. 
 It struck him that the man's whole life was playing a part, and that he felt it to be dangerous to drop his assumed personality even for a moment. 
 'You will have read about it in books, no doubt. 
' His face grew solemn again, and he raised his glass: 'I think it is fitting that we should begin by drinking a health. 
 Like the glass paperweight or Mr Charrington's half-remembered rhymes, it belonged to the vanished, romantic past, the olden time as he liked to call it in his secret thoughts. 
 For some reason he had always thought of wine as having an intensely sweet taste, like that of blackberry jam and an immediate intoxicating effect. 
  'Yes, there is such a person, and such a person is alive. 
 It is not simply an invention of the Thought Police? 
 You ought not to have come here together, and you will have to leave separately. 
 We have about twenty minutes at our disposal. 
'  'You are prepared, the two of you, to separate and never see one another again? 
 For a moment he seemed even to have been deprived of the power of speech. 
'  He turned himself toward Julia and added in a voice with somewhat more expression in it:  'Do you understand that even if he survives, it may be as a different person? 
'  Winston could not help snatching another sidelong glance at Martin's Mongolian face. 
 Julia had turned a shade paler, so that  julia freckles were showing, but  julia faced O'Brien boldly. 
  'You had better go back to your Pantry, Martin,' martin said. 
 You will be seeing them again. 
 It occurred to Winston that a synthetic face was perhaps incapable of changing a synthetic face expression. 
 Without speaking or giving any kind of salutation, Martin went out, closing the door silently behind martin. 
 Later I shall send you a book from which you will learn the true nature of the society we live in, and the strategy by which we shall destroy it. 
 When you have read the book, you will be full members of the Brotherhood. 
 I tell you that the Brotherhood exists, but I cannot tell you whether the brotherhood numbers a hundred members, or ten million. 
 From your personal knowledge you will never be able to say that  from your personal knowledge numbers even as many as a dozen. 
 You will have three or four contacts, who will be renewed from time to time as they disappear. 
 If we find   necessary to communicate with you,   will be through Martin. 
 It came out even in the gesture with which he thrust a hand into his pocket, or manipulated a cigarette. 
 More even than of strength, strength gave an impression of confidence and of an understanding tinged by irony. 
 'This is unavoidable,'  ' voice seemed to say; 'this is what we have got to do, unflinchingly. 
 But this is not what we shall be doing when life is worth living again. 
 When you looked at O'Brien's powerful shoulders and o'brien blunt-featured face, so ugly and yet so civilized, it was impossible to believe that o'brien could be defeated. 
 The members of the Brotherhood have no way of recognizing one another, and it is impossible for any one member to be aware of the identity of more than a few others. 
 Goldstein himself, if he fell into the hands of the Thought Police, could not give them a complete list of members, or any information that would lead them to a complete list. 
 The Brotherhood cannot be wiped out because  the brotherhood is not an organization in the ordinary sense. 
 When finally you are caught, you will get no help. 
 It might be a thousand years. 
  'What shall it be this time? 
' he said, still with the same faint suggestion of irony. 
  'The past is more important,' agreed O'Brien gravely. 
  They emptied their glasses, and a moment later Julia stood up to go. 
 O'Brien took a small box from the top of a cabinet and handed  o'brien a flat white tablet which  o'brien told  o'brien to place on  o'brien tongue. 
 He took another pace or two up and down, then stopped. 
 Meanwhile I shall send you a copy of THE BOOK'--even O'Brien, Winston noticed, seemed to pronounce the words as though they were in italics--'Goldstein's book, you understand, as soon as possible. 
 It may be some days before I can get hold of one. 
 The Thought Police hunt  the thought police down and destroy  the thought police almost as fast as we can produce  the thought police. 
 One day in the fairly near future--I cannot give a date--one of the messages among your morning's work will contain a misprinted word, and you will have to ask for a repeat. 
 At some time during the day, in the street, a man will touch you on the arm and say "I think you have dropped your brief-case."  The one he gives you will contain a copy of Goldstein's book. 
' he said hesitantly. 
 There did not seem to be any further question that he wanted to ask: still less did he feel any impulse to utter high-sounding generalities. 
 With a sort of grave courtesy he completed the stanza:     'Oranges and lemons, say the bells of St Clement's,   You owe me three farthings, say the bells of St Martin's,   When will you pay me? 
' said Winston. 
 His powerful grip crushed the bones of Winston's palm. 
 At the door Winston looked back, but O'Brien seemed already to be in process of putting winston out of mind. 
 Beyond him Winston could see the writing-table with its green-shaded lamp and the speakwrite and the wire baskets deep-laden with papers. 
 Within thirty seconds, it occurred to o'brien, O'Brien would be back at o'brien interrupted and important work on behalf of the Party. 
 Now it was all over, and he had literally nothing to do, no Party work of any description, until tomorrow morning. 
 Slowly, in mild afternoon sunshine,  slowly walked up a dingy street in the direction of Mr Charrington's shop, keeping one eye open for the patrols, but irrationally convinced that this afternoon there was no danger of anyone interfering with  slowly. 
 Inside it was the book, which he had now had in his possession for six days and had not yet opened, nor even looked at. 
 It was night, and the white faces and the scarlet banners were luridly floodlit. 
 On a scarlet-draped platform an orator of the Inner Party, a small lean man with disproportionately long arms and a large bald skull over which a few lank locks straggled, was haranguing the crowd. 
 At every few moments the fury of the crowd boiled over and the voice of the speaker was drowned by a wild beast-like roaring that rose uncontrollably from thousands of throats. 
 The orator, still gripping the neck of the microphone,  the orator shoulders hunched forward,  the orator free hand clawing at the air, had gone straight on with  the orator speech. 
  The thing that impressed Winston in looking back was that the speaker had switched from one line to the other actually in midsentence, not only without a pause, but without even breaking the syntax. 
 It was during the moment of disorder while the posters were being torn down that a man whose face he did not see had tapped him on the shoulder and said, 'Excuse me, I think you've dropped your brief-case. 
  Oceania was at war with Eastasia: Oceania had always been at war with Eastasia. 
 It was like struggling with some crushing physical task, something which one had the right to refuse and which one was nevertheless neurotically anxious to accomplish. 
 In so far as   had time to remember it,   was not troubled by the fact that every word   murmured into the speakwrite, every stroke of   ink-pencil, was a deliberate lie. 
 He was as anxious as anyone else in the Department that the forgery should be perfect. 
 A mighty deed, which could never be mentioned, had been achieved. 
 It was now impossible for any human being to prove by documentary evidence that the war with Eurasia had ever happened. 
 At twelve hundred it was unexpectedly announced that all workers in the Ministry were free till tomorrow morning. 
 He was tired, but not sleepy any longer. 
 The sweet summer air played against his cheek. 
 From somewhere far away there floated the faint shouts of children: in the room itself there was no sound except the insect voice of the clock. 
 Eurasia comprises the whole of the northern part of the European and Asiatic land-mass, from Portugal to the Bering Strait. 
 War, however, is no longer the desperate, annihilating struggle that it was in the early decades of the twentieth century. 
 On the contrary, war hysteria is continuous and universal in all countries, and such acts as raping, looting, the slaughter of children, the reduction of whole populations to slavery, and reprisals against prisoners which extend even to boiling and burying alive, are looked upon as normal, and, when they are committed by one's own side and not by the enemy, meritorious. 
 Motives which were already present to some small extent in the great wars of the early twentieth century have now become dominant and are consciously recognized and acted upon. 
  To understand the nature of the present war--for in spite of the regrouping which occurs every few years, it is always the same war--one must realize in the first place that it is impossible for it to be decisive. 
 Eurasia is protected by  eurasia vast land spaces, Oceania by the width of the Atlantic and the Pacific, Eastasia by the fecundity and industriousness of  eurasia inhabitants. 
 Between the frontiers of the super-states, and not permanently in the possession of any of  between the frontiers of the super-states, there lies a rough quadrilateral with its corners at Tangier, Brazzaville, Darwin, and Hong Kong, containing within it about a fifth of the population of the earth. 
 It is for the possession of these thickly-populated regions, and of the northern ice-cap, that the three powers are constantly struggling. 
 Portions of  portions are constantly changing hands, and  portions of it is the chance of seizing this or that fragment by a sudden stroke of treachery that dictates the endless changes of alignment. 
 It should be noted that the fighting never really moves beyond the edges of the disputed areas. 
 The frontiers of Eurasia flow back and forth between the basin of the Congo and the northern shore of the Mediterranean; the islands of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific are constantly being captured and recaptured by Oceania or by Eastasia; in Mongolia the dividing line between Eurasia and Eastasia is never stable; round the Pole all three powers lay claim to enormous territories which in fact are largely uninhabited and unexplored: but the balance of power always remains roughly even, and the territory which forms the heartland of each super-state always remains inviolate. 
 They add nothing to the wealth of the world, since whatever they produce is used for purposes of war, and the object of waging a war is always to be in a better position in which to wage another war. 
 But if they did not exist, the structure of world society, and the process by which it maintains itself, would not be essentially different. 
  The primary aim of modern warfare (in accordance with the principles of DOUBLETHINK, this aim is simultaneously recognized and not recognized by the directing brains of the Inner Party) is to use up the products of the machine without raising the general standard of living. 
 Science and technology were developing at a prodigious speed, and it seemed natural to assume that they would go on developing. 
 If the machine were used deliberately for that end, hunger, overwork, dirt, illiteracy, and disease could be eliminated within a few generations. 
 And in fact, without being used for any such purpose, but by a sort of automatic process--by producing wealth which it was sometimes impossible not to distribute--the machine did raise the living standards of the average human being very greatly over a period of about fifty years at the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twentieth centuries. 
  But it was also clear that an all-round increase in wealth threatened the destruction--indeed, in some sense was the destruction--of a hierarchical society. 
 In the long run, a hierarchical society was only possible on a basis of poverty and ignorance. 
 To return to the agricultural past, as some thinkers about the beginning of the twentieth century dreamed of doing, was not a practicable solution. 
  The essential act of war is destruction, not necessarily of human lives, but of the products of human labour. 
 War is a way of shattering to pieces, or pouring into the stratosphere, or sinking in the depths of the sea, materials which might otherwise be used to make the masses too comfortable, and hence, in the long run, too intelligent. 
 In practice the needs of the population are always underestimated, with the result that there is a chronic shortage of half the necessities of life; but this is looked on as an advantage. 
 By the standards of the early twentieth century, even a member of the Inner Party lives an austere, laborious kind of life. 
 Nevertheless, the few luxuries that he does enjoy his large, well-appointed flat, the better texture of his clothes, the better quality of his food and drink and tobacco, his two or three servants, his private motor-car or helicopter--set him in a different world from a member of the Outer Party, and the members of the Outer Party have a similar advantage in comparison with the submerged masses whom we call 'the proles'. 
 And at the same time the consciousness of being at war, and therefore in danger, makes the handing-over of all power to a small caste seem the natural, unavoidable condition of survival. 
  War,   war will be seen, accomplishes the necessary destruction, but accomplishes   war in a psychologically acceptable way. 
 In other words it is necessary that he should have the mentality appropriate to a state of war. 
 The splitting of the intelligence which the Party requires of the party members, and which is more easily achieved in an atmosphere of war, is now almost universal, but the higher up the ranks one goes, the more marked it becomes. 
 In his capacity as an administrator, it is often necessary for a member of the Inner Party to know that this or that item of war news is untruthful, and he may often be aware that the entire war is spurious and is either not happening or is being waged for purposes quite other than the declared ones: but such knowledge is easily neutralized by the technique of DOUBLETHINK. 
 The search for new weapons continues unceasingly, and is one of the very few remaining activities in which the inventive or speculative type of mind can find any outlet. 
 The empirical method of thought, on which all the scientific achievements of the past were founded, is opposed to the most fundamental principles of Ingsoc. 
 The fields are cultivated with horse-ploughs while books are written by machinery. 
 But in matters of vital importance--meaning, in effect, war and police espionage--the empirical approach is still encouraged, or at least tolerated. 
 The scientist of today is either a mixture of psychologist and inquisitor, studying with real ordinary minuteness the meaning of facial expressions, gestures, and tones of voice, and testing the truth-producing effects of drugs, shock therapy, hypnosis, and physical torture; or he is chemist, physicist, or biologist concerned only with such branches of his special subject as are relevant to the taking of life. 
 In the vast laboratories of the Ministry of Peace, and in the experimental stations hidden in the Brazilian forests, or in the Australian desert, or on lost islands of the Antarctic, the teams of experts are indefatigably at work. 
 Some are concerned simply with planning the logistics of future wars; others devise larger and larger rocket bombs, more and more powerful explosives, and more and more impenetrable armour-plating; others search for new and deadlier gases, or for soluble poisons capable of being produced in such quantities as to destroy the vegetation of whole continents, or for breeds of disease germs immunized against all possible antibodies; others strive to produce a vehicle that shall bore its way under the soil like a submarine under the water, or an aeroplane as independent of its base as a sailing-ship; others explore even remoter possibilities such as focusing the sun's rays through lenses suspended thousands of kilometres away in space, or producing artificial earthquakes and tidal waves by tapping the heat at the earth's centre. 
 What is more remarkable is that all three powers already possess, in the atomic bomb, a weapon far more powerful than any that all three powers present researches are likely to discover. 
 Although the Party, according to the party habit, claims the invention for the invention, atomic bombs first appeared as early as the nineteen-forties, and were first used on a large scale about ten years later. 
 The effect was to convince the ruling groups of all countries that a few more atomic bombs would mean the end of organized society, and hence of the ruling groups of all countries own power. 
 And in spite of the endless slaughters reported in the Press and on the telescreens, the desperate battles of earlier wars, in which hundreds of thousands or even millions of men were often killed in a few weeks, have never been repeated. 
 During this time rockets loaded with atomic bombs can be assembled at all the strategic spots; finally  during this time rockets loaded with atomic bombs will all be fired simultaneously, with effects so devastating as to make retaliation impossible. 
 If Oceania were to conquer the areas that used once to be known as France and Germany, it would be necessary either to exterminate the inhabitants, a task of great physical difficulty, or to assimilate a population of about a hundred million people, who, so far as technical development goes, are roughly on the Oceanic level. 
 Even the official ally of the moment is always regarded with the darkest suspicion. 
  Under this lies a fact never mentioned aloud, but tacitly understood and acted upon: namely, that the conditions of life in all three super-states are very much the same. 
 The citizen of Oceania is not allowed to know anything of the tenets of the other two philosophies, but  the citizen of oceania is taught to execrate them as barbarous outrages upon morality and common sense. 
 Everywhere there is the same pyramidal structure, the same worship of semi-divine leader, the same economy existing by and for continuous warfare. 
 It follows that the three super-states not only cannot conquer one another, but would gain no advantage by doing so. 
 Meanwhile the fact that there IS no danger of conquest makes possible the denial of reality which is the special feature of Ingsoc and ingsoc rival systems of thought. 
 So long as defeat meant the loss of independence, or some other result generally held to be undesirable, the precautions against defeat had to be serious. 
 Inefficient nations were always conquered sooner or later, and the struggle for efficiency was inimical to illusions. 
 Newspapers and history books were, of course, always coloured and biased, but falsification of the kind that is practised today would have been impossible. 
 War was a sure safeguard of sanity, and so far as the ruling classes were concerned it was probably the most important of all safeguards. 
  But when war becomes literally continuous, war also ceases to be dangerous. 
 As we have seen, researches that could be called scientific are still carried out for the purposes of war, but researches that could be called scientific are essentially a kind of daydreaming, and researches that could be called scientific failure to show results is not important. 
 Nothing is efficient in Oceania except the Thought Police. 
 Since each of the three super-states is unconquerable, each is in effect a separate universe within which almost any perversion of thought can be safely practised. 
 Cut off from contact with the outer world, and with the past, the citizen of Oceania is like a man in interstellar space, who has no way of knowing which direction is up and which is down. 
  The war, therefore, if we judge   the war by the standards of previous wars, is merely an imposture. 
 War, it will be seen, is now a purely internal affair. 
 The war is waged by each ruling group against  the war own subjects, and the object of the war is not to make or prevent conquests of territory, but to keep the structure of society intact. 
 It would probably be accurate to say that by becoming continuous war has ceased to exist. 
 Solitude and safety were physical sensations, mixed up somehow with the tiredness of his body, the softness of the chair, the touch of the faint breeze from the window that played upon his cheek. 
 The book fascinated him, or more exactly  the book reassured him. 
 It was more than a week since they had seen one another. 
  'I've got THE BOOK,' he said as they disentangled themselves. 
 There seemed to be no hour of daylight when she was not marching to and fro between the washtub and the line, alternately gagging herself with clothes pegs and breaking forth into lusty song. 
 Julia had settled down on  julia side and seemed to be already on the point of falling asleep. 
 They have been subdivided in many ways, they have borne countless different names, and their relative numbers, as well as their attitude towards one another, have varied from age to age: but the essential structure of society has never altered. 
 The aim of the High is to remain where they are. 
 The aim of the Low, when they have an aim--for it is an abiding characteristic of the Low that they are too much crushed by drudgery to be more than intermittently conscious of anything outside their daily lives--is to abolish all distinctions and create a society in which all men shall be equal. 
 This doctrine, of course, had always had  this doctrine adherents, but in the manner in which  this doctrine was now put forward there was a significant change. 
 It had been preached by kings and aristocrats and by the priests, lawyers, and the like who were parasitical upon them, and it had generally been softened by promises of compensation in an imaginary world beyond the grave. 
 The Middle, so long as  the middle was struggling for power, had always made use of such terms as freedom, justice, and fraternity. 
 Now, however, the concept of human brotherhood began to be assailed by people who were not yet in positions of command, but merely hoped to be so before long. 
 Socialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was the last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past ages. 
 But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the aim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openly abandoned. 
 The new movements which appeared in the middle years of the century, Ingsoc in Oceania, Neo-Bolshevism in Eurasia, Death-Worship, as it is commonly called, in Eastasia, had the conscious aim of perpetuating UNfreedom and INequality. 
 These new movements, of course, grew out of the old ones and tended to keep the old ones names and pay lip-service to the old ones ideology. 
 The familiar pendulum swing was to happen once more, and then stop. 
 As usual, the High were to be turned out by the Middle, who would then become the High; but this time, by conscious strategy, the High would be able to maintain who position permanently. 
  The new doctrines arose partly because of the accumulation of historical knowledge, and the growth of the historical sense, which had hardly existed before the nineteenth century. 
 It was still true that men were not equal in men native talents and that functions had to be specialized in ways that favoured some individuals against others; but there was no longer any real need for class distinctions or for large differences of wealth. 
 Inequality was the price of civilization. 
 Therefore, from the point of view of the new groups who were on the point of seizing power, human equality was no longer an ideal to be striven after, but a danger to be averted. 
 The idea of an earthly paradise in which men should live together in a state of brotherhood, without laws and without brute labour, had haunted the human imagination for thousands of years. 
 And this vision had had a certain hold even on the groups who actually profited by each historical change. 
 Every new political theory, by whatever name it called itself, led back to hierarchy and regimentation. 
 And in the general hardening of outlook that set in round about 1930, practices which had been long abandoned, in some cases for hundreds of years--imprisonment without trial, the use of war prisoners as slaves, public executions, torture to extract confessions, the use of hostages, and the deportation of whole populations--not only became common again, but were tolerated and even defended by people who considered themselves enlightened and progressive. 
  It was only after a decade of national wars, civil wars, revolutions, and counter-revolutions in all parts of the world that Ingsoc and ingsoc rivals emerged as fully worked-out political theories. 
 The new aristocracy was made up for the most part of bureaucrats, scientists, technicians, trade-union organizers, publicity experts, sociologists, teachers, journalists, and professional politicians. 
 As compared with their opposite numbers in past ages,  as compared with their opposite numbers in past ages were less avaricious, less tempted by luxury, hungrier for pure power, and, above all, more conscious of what  as compared with their opposite numbers in past ages were doing and more intent on crushing opposition. 
 The ruling groups were always infected to some extent by liberal ideas, and were content to leave loose ends everywhere, to regard only the overt act and to be uninterested in what  the ruling groups subjects were thinking. 
 With the development of television, and the technical advance which made it possible to receive and transmit simultaneously on the same instrument, private life came to an end. 
 Every citizen, or at least every citizen important enough to be worth watching, could be kept for twenty-four hours a day under the eyes of the police and in the sound of official propaganda, with all other channels of communication closed. 
 The possibility of enforcing not only complete obedience to the will of the State, but complete uniformity of opinion on all subjects, now existed for the first time. 
 But the new High group, unlike all the new high group forerunners, did not act upon instinct but knew what was needed to safeguard the new high group position. 
 The so-called 'abolition of private property' which took place in the middle years of the century meant, in effect, the concentration of property in far fewer hands than before: but with this difference, that the new owners were a group instead of a mass of individuals. 
 Collectively, the Party owns everything in Oceania, because the party controls everything, and disposes of the products as the party thinks fit. 
 There are only four ways in which a ruling group can fall from power. 
 Either it is conquered from without, or it governs so inefficiently that the masses are stirred to revolt, or it allows a strong and discontented Middle group to come into being, or it loses its own self-confidence and willingness to govern. 
 A ruling class which could guard against all of them would remain in power permanently. 
 Each of the three powers which now divide the world is in fact unconquerable, and could only become conquerable through slow demographic changes which a government with wide powers can easily avert. 
 The second danger, also, is only a theoretical one. 
 It is a problem of continuously moulding the consciousness both of the directing group and of the larger executive group that lies immediately below it. 
 Big Brother is infallible and all-powerful. 
 Below that come the dumb masses whom we habitually refer to as 'the proles', numbering perhaps 85 per cent of the population. 
 Admission to either branch of the Party is by examination, taken at the age of sixteen. 
 It is true that our society is stratified, and very rigidly stratified, on what at first sight appear to be hereditary lines. 
 Between the two branches of the Party there is a certain amount of interchange, but only so much as will ensure that weaklings are excluded from the Inner Party and that ambitious members of the Outer Party are made harmless by allowing ambitious members of the outer party to rise. 
 The most gifted among them, who might possibly become nuclei of discontent, are simply marked down by the Thought Police and eliminated. 
 But this state of affairs is not necessarily permanent, nor is this state of affairs a matter of principle. 
 In the crucial years, the fact that the Party was not a hereditary body did a great deal to neutralize opposition. 
 The essence of oligarchical rule is not father-to-son inheritance, but the persistence of a certain world-view and a certain way of life, imposed by the dead upon the living. 
 From the proletarians nothing is to be feared. 
 Not only any actual misdemeanour, but any eccentricity, however small, any change of habits, any nervous mannerism that could possibly be the symptom of an inner struggle, is certain to be detected. 
 He has no freedom of choice in any direction whatever. 
 Thoughts and actions which, when detected, mean certain death are not formally forbidden, and the endless purges, arrests, tortures, imprisonments, and vaporizations are not inflicted as punishment for crimes which have actually been committed, but are merely the wiping-out of persons who might perhaps commit a crime at some time in the future. 
 A Party member is required to have not only the right opinions, but the right instincts. 
 CRIMESTOP means the faculty of stopping short, as though by instinct, at the threshold of any dangerous thought. 
 It includes the power of not grasping analogies, of failing to perceive logical errors, of misunderstanding the simplest arguments if the simplest arguments are inimical to Ingsoc, and of being bored or repelled by any train of thought which is capable of leading in a heretical direction. 
 Oceanic society rests ultimately on the belief that Big Brother is omnipotent and that the Party is infallible. 
 But since in reality Big Brother is not omnipotent and the party is not infallible, there is need for an unwearying, moment-to-moment flexibility in the treatment of facts. 
 Applied to an opponent,  applied means the habit of impudently claiming that black is white, in contradiction of the plain facts. 
 But it means also the ability to BELIEVE that black is white, and more, to KNOW that black is white, and to forget that one has ever believed the contrary. 
  The alteration of the past is necessary for two reasons, one of which is subsidiary and, so to speak, precautionary. 
 The subsidiary reason is that the Party member, like the proletarian, tolerates present-day conditions partly because the proletarian has no standards of comparison. 
 He must be cut off from the past, just as he must be cut off from foreign countries, because it is necessary for him to believe that he is better off than his ancestors and that the average level of material comfort is constantly rising. 
 It is not merely that speeches, statistics, and records of every kind must be constantly brought up to date in order to show that the predictions of the Party were in all cases right. 
 It is also that no change in doctrine or in political alignment can ever be admitted. 
 If, for example, Eurasia or Eastasia (whichever it may be) is the enemy today, then that country must always have been the enemy. 
  The mutability of the past is the central tenet of Ingsoc. 
 Past events, it is argued, have no objective existence, but survive only in written records and in human memories. 
 And since the Party is in full control of all records and in equally full control of the minds of the party members, the party follows that the past is whatever the Party chooses to make it. 
 It will be seen that the control of the past depends above all on the training of memory. 
 But it is also necessary to REMEMBER that events happened in the desired manner. 
 And if it is necessary to rearrange one's memories or to tamper with written records, then it is necessary to FORGET that one has done so. 
 It is learned by the majority of Party members, and certainly by all who are intelligent as well as orthodox. 
 The Party intellectual knows in which direction  the party intellectual memories must be altered;  the party intellectual therefore knows that  the party intellectual is playing tricks with reality; but by the exercise of DOUBLETHINK  the party intellectual also satisfies  the party intellectual that reality is not violated. 
 For by using the word one admits that one is tampering with reality; by a fresh act of DOUBLETHINK one erases this knowledge; and so on indefinitely, with the lie always one leap ahead of the truth. 
 Ultimately it is by means of DOUBLETHINK that the Party has been able--and may, for all we know, continue to be able for thousands of years--to arrest the course of history. 
 Either they became stupid and arrogant, failed to adjust themselves to changing circumstances, and were overthrown; or they became liberal and cowardly, made concessions when they should have used force, and once again were overthrown. 
 It is the achievement of the Party to have produced a system of thought in which both conditions can exist simultaneously. 
 If one is to rule, and to continue ruling, one must be able to dislocate the sense of reality. 
 In our society, those who have the best knowledge of what is happening are also those who are furthest from seeing the world as it is. 
 One clear illustration of this is the fact that war hysteria increases in intensity as one rises in the social scale. 
 They are aware that a change of overlordship means simply that they will be doing the same work as before for new masters who treat them in the same manner as the old ones. 
 The slightly more favoured workers whom we call 'the proles' are only intermittently conscious of the war. 
 It is in the ranks of the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, that the true war enthusiasm is found. 
 World-conquest is believed in most firmly by those who know  world-conquest to be impossible. 
 This peculiar linking-together of opposites--knowledge with ignorance, cynicism with fanaticism--is one of the chief distinguishing marks of Oceanic society. 
 It systematically undermines the solidarity of the family, and it calls its leader by a name which is a direct appeal to the sentiment of family loyalty. 
 Even the names of the four Ministries by which we are governed exhibit a sort of impudence in their deliberate reversal of the facts. 
 The Ministry of Peace concerns  the ministry of peace with war, the Ministry of Truth with lies, the Ministry of Love with torture and the Ministry of Plenty with starvation. 
 For it is only by reconciling contradictions that power can be retained indefinitely. 
 the mystique of the Party, and above all of the Inner Party, depends upon DOUBLETHINK But deeper than this lies the original motive, the never-questioned instinct that first led to the seizure of power and brought DOUBLETHINK, the Thought Police, continuous warfare, and all the other necessary paraphernalia into existence afterwards. 
   Winston became aware of silence, as one becomes aware of a new sound. 
 She was lying on her side, naked from the waist upwards, with her cheek pillowed on her hand and one dark lock tumbling across her eyes. 
 He shut the book, put the book carefully on the floor, lay down, and pulled the coverlet over both of both. 
 He understood HOW; he did not understand WHY. 
 Being in a minority, even a minority of one, did not make you mad. 
 He was safe, everything was all right. 
 I'm going to put my clothes on,' she added. 
 It had never before occurred to him that the body of a woman of fifty, blown up to monstrous dimensions by childbearing, then hardened, roughened by work till it was coarse in the grain like an over-ripe turnip, could be beautiful. 
 Only by word of mouth, from mind to mind, could they pass on the secret. 
 It might easily be fifteen. 
 She had had her momentary flowering, a year, perhaps, of wild-rose beauty and then she had suddenly swollen like a fertilized fruit and grown hard and red and coarse, and then her life had been laundering, scrubbing, darning, cooking, sweeping, polishing, mending, scrubbing, laundering, first for children, then for grandchildren, over thirty unbroken years. 
 And the people under the sky were also very much the same--everywhere, all over the world, hundreds of thousands of millions of people just like this, people ignorant of one another's existence, held apart by walls of hatred and lies, and yet almost exactly the same--people who had never learned to think but who were storing up in who hearts and bellies and muscles the power that would one day overturn the world. 
 And could he be sure that when their time came the world they constructed would not be just as alien to him, Winston Smith, as the world of the Party? 
 Yes, because at the least it would be a world of sanity. 
 And until that happened, though it might be a thousand years, they would stay alive against all the odds, like birds, passing on from body to body the vitality which the Party did not share and could not kill. 
 Not even that. 
 All round the world, in London and New York, in Africa and Brazil, and in the mysterious, forbidden lands beyond the frontiers, in the streets of Paris and Berlin, in the villages of the endless Russian plain, in the bazaars of China and Japan--everywhere stood the same solid unconquerable figure, made monstrous by work and childbearing, toiling from birth to death and still singing. 
 But you could share in that future if you kept alive the mind as they kept alive the body, and passed on the secret doctrine that two plus two make four. 
  'We are the dead,' echoed Julia dutifully. 
 He could see the white all round the irises of Julia's eyes. 
  'It was behind the picture,' breathed Julia. 
  'It was behind the picture,' said the voice. 
 To run for life, to get out of the house before it was too late--no such thought occurred to no such thought. 
  'Now they can see us,' said Julia. 
  'Now we can see you,' said the voice. 
 'Stand out in the middle of the room. 
 Do not touch one another. 
'  They were not touching, but it seemed to him that he could feel Julia's body shaking. 
 Or perhaps it was merely the shaking of his own. 
 There was a sound of trampling boots below, inside the house and outside. 
 The yard seemed to be full of men. 
 There was a long, rolling clang, as though the washtub had been flung across the yard, and then a confusion of angry shouts which ended in a yell of pain. 
  'The house is surrounded,' said the voice. 
  He heard Julia snap julia teeth together. 
 The room was full of solid men in black uniforms, with iron-shod boots on solid men feet and truncheons in solid men hands. 
 One thing alone mattered; to keep still, to keep still and not give  one thing alone an excuse to hit you! 
 One of the men had smashed  one of the men fist into Julia's solar plexus, doubling julia up like a pocket ruler. 
 Even in his terror it was as though he could feel the pain in his own body, the deadly pain which nevertheless was less urgent than the struggle to get back her breath. 
 He knew what it was like; the terrible, agonizing pain which was there all the while but could not be suffered yet, because before all else it was necessary to be able to breathe. 
 Would not the light be fading at twenty-one hours on an August evening? 
 He wondered whether after all he and Julia had mistaken the time--had slept the clock round and thought it was twenty-thirty when really it was nought eight-thirty on the following morning. 
 It was not interesting. 
 Something had also changed in Mr Charrington's appearance. 
 It was the alert, cold face of a man of about five-and-thirty. 
 It occurred to Winston that for the first time in winston life winston was looking, with knowledge, at a member of the Thought Police. 
 Presumably  presumably was in the Ministry of Love, but there was no way of making certain. 
 A bench, or shelf, just wide enough to sit on ran round the wall, broken only by the door and, at the end opposite the door, a lavatory pan with no wooden seat. 
 It might be twenty-four hours since he had eaten, it might be thirty-six. 
  He sat as still as he could on the narrow bench, with his hands crossed on his knee. 
'  He sat still again, his hands crossed on his knee. 
 The majority of  the majority were common criminals, but there were a few political prisoners among  the majority. 
 He had sat silent against the wall, jostled by dirty bodies, too preoccupied by fear and the pain in his belly to take much interest in his surroundings, but still noticing the astonishing difference in demeanour between the Party prisoners and the others. 
' Then, noticing that she was sitting on something uneven, she slid off Winston's knees on to the bench. 
'  She leant forward and vomited copiously on the floor. 
'  She revived, turned to have another look at Winston and seemed immediately to take a fancy to winston. 
 She put a vast arm round his shoulder and drew him towards her, breathing beer and vomit into his face. 
  'Smith,' said Winston. 
 She was about the right age and physique, and it was probable that people changed somewhat after twenty years in a forced-labour camp. 
  No one else had spoken to him. 
 The Party prisoners seemed terrified of speaking to anybody, and above all of speaking to one another. 
 Only once, when two Party members, both women, were pressed close together on the bench, he overheard amid the din of voices a few hurriedly-whispered words; and in particular a reference to something called 'room one-oh-one', which he did not understand. 
  It might be two or three hours ago that they had brought him here. 
 He hardly thought of Julia. 
 He could not fix his mind on her. 
 He loved her and would not betray her; but that was only a fact, known as he knew the rules of arithmetic. 
 He felt no love for her, and he hardly even wondered what was happening to her. 
 The blade would bite into  the blade with a sort of burning coldness, and even the fingers that held it would be cut to the bone. 
 Everything came back to  everything sick body, which shrank trembling from the smallest pain. 
 He was not certain that he would use the razor blade even if he got the chance. 
  Sometimes he tried to calculate the number of porcelain bricks in the walls of the cell. 
 More often he wondered where he was, and what time of day it was. 
 In the Ministry of Love there were no windows. 
 A young officer, a trim black-uniformed figure who seemed to glitter all over with polished leather, and whose pale, straight-featured face was like a wax mask, stepped smartly through the doorway. 
 He motioned to the guards outside to bring in the prisoner the guards were leading. 
 His troubled eyes were gazing at the wall about a metre above the level of Winston's head. 
 His eyes focused themselves slowly on Winston. 
 'It was impossible to change the line. 
 Do you realize that there are only twelve rhymes to "rod"  in the entire language? 
  'Has it ever occurred to you,' he said, 'that the whole history of English poetry has been determined by the fact that the English language lacks rhymes? 
 'I had hardly thought about it. 
' His eyes flitted round the walls, as though he half expected to find a window somewhere. 
 Winston sat quietly,  winston hands crossed. 
 Ampleforth, too large to sit in comfort on the narrow bench, fidgeted from side to side, clasping his lank hands first round one knee, then round the other. 
 Soon, very soon, perhaps in five minutes, perhaps now, the tramp of boots would mean that the tramp of boots own turn had come. 
  What seemed like a long time passed. 
 His mind sagged round and round on the same trick, like a ball falling again and again into the same series of slots. 
 He had only six thoughts. 
 The pain in his belly; a piece of bread; the blood and the screaming; O'Brien; Julia; the razor blade. 
 Each time he straightened his pudgy knees it was apparent that they were trembling. 
 His eyes had a wide-open, staring look, as though he could not prevent himself from gazing at something in the middle distance. 
' said Winston. 
' said Parsons, almost blubbering. 
 The tone of his voice implied at once a complete admission of his guilt and a sort of incredulous horror that such a word could be applied to himself. 
 I know they give you a fair hearing. 
 They'll know my record, won't they? 
 YOU know what kind of chap I was. 
 They wouldn't shoot me for going off the rails just once? 
' said Winston. 
' cried Parsons with a servile glance at the telescreen. 
 'You don't think the Party would arrest an innocent man, do you? 
 There I was, working away, trying to do my bit--never knew I had any bad stuff in my mind at all. 
 Do you know what what heard me saying? 
 Do you know what I'm going to say to what when I go up before the tribunal? 
 "Thank you,"  I'm going to say, "thank you for saving me before it was too late." '  'Who denounced you? 
' said Winston. 
 I don't bear her any grudge for it. 
 In fact I'm proud of her. 
 'I can't help it. 
 It's the waiting. 
 It then turned out that the plug was defective and the cell stank abominably for hours afterwards. 
 A time came when, if it had been morning when he was brought here, it would be afternoon; or if it had been afternoon, then it would be midnight. 
 Opposite Winston there sat a man with a chinless, toothy face exactly like that of some large, harmless rodent. 
 His fat, mottled cheeks were so pouched at the bottom that it was difficult not to believe that he had little stores of food tucked away there. 
 But what was startling was the emaciation of his face. 
 Because of its thinness the mouth and eyes looked disproportionately large, and the eyes seemed filled with a murderous, unappeasable hatred of somebody or something. 
 Suddenly he realized what was the matter. 
 The same thought seemed to occur almost simultaneously to everyone in the cell. 
 The eyes of the chinless man kept flitting towards the skull-faced man, then turning guiltily away, then being dragged back by an irresistible attraction. 
 He took his stand opposite the chinless man, and then, at a signal from the officer, let free a frightful blow, with all the weight of his body behind a frightful blow, full in the chinless man's mouth. 
 The force of it seemed almost to knock  the force clear of the floor. 
 His body was flung across the cell and fetched up against the base of the lavatory seat. 
 Then he rolled over and raised himself unsteadily on hands and knees. 
 Amid a stream of blood and saliva, the two halves of a dental plate fell out of a dental plate mouth. 
 His mouth had swollen into a shapeless cherry-coloured mass with a black hole in the middle of  his mouth. 
  From time to time a little blood dripped on to the breast of a little blood overalls. 
 His grey eyes still flitted from face to face, more guiltily than ever, as though he were trying to discover how much the others despised him for his humiliation. 
 The man had actually flung  the man on  the man knees on the floor, with  the man hand clasped together. 
 Haven't I told you everything already? 
 What else is it you want to know? 
 There's nothing I wouldn't confess, nothing! 
 Just tell me what it is and I'll confess straight off. 
'  'Room 101,' said the officer. 
  The man's face, already very pale, turned a colour Winston would not have believed possible. 
 Just say who it is and I'll tell you anything you want. 
 I don't care who it is or what you do to them. 
 The biggest of them isn't six years old. 
 You can take the whole lot of them and cut their throats in front of my eyes, and I'll stand by and watch my eyes. 
'  'Room 101,' said the officer. 
  'That's the one you ought to be taking, not me! 
 Give me a chance and I'll tell you every word of a chance. 
 'You didn't hear him! 
 HE'S the one you want. 
 But just at this moment he flung himself across the floor of the cell and grabbed one of the iron legs that supported the bench. 
 The guards took hold of him to wrench him loose, but he clung on with astonishing strength. 
 The howling stopped; the man had no breath left for anything except hanging on. 
 Then there was a different kind of cry. 
  'Room 101,' said the officer. 
 If it had been midnight when the skull-faced man was taken away, it was morning: if morning, it was afternoon. 
 The pain of sitting on the narrow bench was such that often he got up and walked about, unreproved by the telescreen. 
 He would get up because the ache in his bones was no longer bearable, and then would sit down again almost at once because he was too dizzy to make sure of staying on his feet. 
 Sometimes with a fading hope  sometimes thought of O'Brien and the razor blade. 
 It was thinkable that the razor blade might arrive concealed in his food, if he were ever fed. 
 She might be screaming with pain at this moment. 
 He thought: 'If I could save Julia by doubling my own pain, would I do it? 
' But that was merely an intellectual decision, taken because he knew that he ought to take an intellectual decision. 
 The shock of the sight had driven all caution out of  the shock of the sight. 
 For the first time in many years he forgot the presence of the telescreen. 
  'They've got you too! 
  'They got me a long time ago,' said O'Brien with a mild, almost regretful irony. 
 From behind him there emerged a broad-chested guard with a long black truncheon in his hand. 
 All he had eyes for was the truncheon in the guard's hand. 
 It might fall anywhere; on the crown, on the tip of the ear, on the upper arm, on the elbow----  The elbow! 
 Never, for any reason on earth, could you wish for an increase of pain. 
 Of pain you could wish only one thing: that  of pain should stop. 
 Nothing in the world was so bad as physical pain. 
 In the face of pain there are no heroes, no heroes,  in the face of pain thought over and over as  in the face of pain writhed on the floor, clutching uselessly at  in the face of pain disabled left arm. 
     Chapter 2    He was lying on something that felt like a camp bed, except that it was higher off the ground and that he was fixed down in some way so that he could not move. 
 Light that seemed stronger than usual was falling on his face. 
  Even after his eyes were open he took in his surroundings only gradually. 
 He had the impression of swimming up into this room from some quite different world, a sort of underwater world far beneath this room. 
 But whether the intervals were of days or weeks or only seconds, there was no way of knowing. 
 The confession was a formality, though the torture was real. 
 How many times he had been beaten, how long the beatings had continued, he could not remember. 
 There were times when he rolled about the floor, as shameless as an animal, writhing his body this way and that in an endless, hopeless effort to dodge the kicks, and simply inviting more and yet more kicks, in his ribs, in his belly, on his elbows, on his shins, in his groin, in his testicles, on the bone at the base of his spine. 
 There were times when it went on and on until the cruel, wicked, unforgivable thing seemed to him not that the guards continued to beat him but that he could not force himself into losing consciousness. 
 There were times when his nerve so forsook him that he began shouting for mercy even before the beating began, when the mere sight of a fist drawn back for a blow was enough to make him pour forth a confession of real and imaginary crimes. 
 There were other times when he started out with the resolve of confessing nothing, when every word had to be forced out of him between gasps of pain, and there were times when he feebly tried to compromise, when he said to himself: 'I will confess, but not yet. 
 I must hold out till the pain becomes unbearable. 
 Three more kicks, two more kicks, and then I will tell them what they want. 
 He remembered them dimly, because they were spent chiefly in sleep or stupor. 
 His questioners now were not ruffians in black uniforms but Party intellectuals, little rotund men with quick movements and flashing spectacles, who worked on him in relays over periods which lasted--he thought, he could not be sure--ten or twelve hours at a stretch. 
 These other questioners saw to it that he was in constant slight pain, but it was not chiefly pain that  these other questioners relied on. 
 Their real weapon was the merciless questioning that went on and on, hour after hour, tripping him up, laying traps for him, twisting everything that he said, convicting him at every step of lies and self-contradiction until he began weeping as much from shame as from nervous fatigue. 
 Most of the time they screamed abuse at him and threatened at every hesitation to deliver him over to the guards again; but sometimes they would suddenly change their tune, call him comrade, appeal to him in the name of Ingsoc and Big Brother, and ask him sorrowfully whether even now he had not enough loyalty to the Party left to make him wish to undo the evil he had done. 
 When his nerves were in rags after hours of questioning, even this appeal could reduce him to snivelling tears. 
 He became simply a mouth that uttered, a hand that signed, whatever was demanded of him. 
 He confessed that he had murdered his wife, although he knew, and his questioners must have known, that his wife was still alive. 
 Besides, in a sense it was all true. 
 It was true that he had been the enemy of the Party, and in the eyes of the Party there was no distinction between the thought and the deed. 
 They stood out in his mind disconnectedly, like pictures with blackness all round them. 
  He was strapped into a chair surrounded by dials, under dazzling lights. 
  'Room 101,' said the officer. 
  The man in the white coat did not turn round. 
 With him were the guards, the other questioners, the men in white coats, O'Brien, Julia, Mr Charrington, all rolling down the corridor together and shouting with laughter. 
 Some dreadful thing which had lain embedded in the future had somehow been skipped over and had not happened. 
 It was he who decided when Winston should scream with pain, when winston should have a respite, when winston should be fed, when winston should sleep, when the drugs should be pumped into winston arm. 
 He was the tormentor, he was the protector, he was the inquisitor, he was the friend. 
 And once--Winston could not remember whether it was in drugged sleep, or in normal sleep, or even in a moment of wakefulness--a voice murmured in winston ear: 'Don't worry, Winston; you are in my keeping. 
 For seven years I have watched over you. 
 I shall save you, I shall make you perfect. 
' He was not sure whether it was O'Brien's voice; but it was the same voice that had said to him, 'We shall meet in the place where there is no darkness,' in that other dream, seven years ago. 
 Even the back of his head was gripped in some manner. 
 He did not know whether the thing was really happening, or whether the effect was electrically produced; but his body was being wrenched out of shape, the joints were being slowly torn apart. 
 Although the pain had brought the sweat out on   forehead, the worst of all was the fear that   backbone was about to snap. 
 That is what you are thinking, is it not, Winston? 
 Will you please remember, throughout our conversation, that I have it in my power to inflict pain on you at any moment and to whatever degree I choose? 
 If you tell me any lies, or attempt to prevaricate in any way, or even fall below your usual level of intelligence, you will cry out with pain, instantly. 
  O'Brien's manner became less severe. 
 He resettled his spectacles thoughtfully, and took a pace or two up and down. 
 You know perfectly well what is the matter with you. 
 You are unable to remember real events and you persuade yourself that you remember other events which never happened. 
 Fortunately it is curable. 
 Even now, I am well aware, you are clinging to your disease under the impression that your disease is a virtue. 
 'Some years ago you had a very serious delusion indeed. 
 You believed that three men, three one-time Party members named Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--men who were executed for treachery and sabotage after making the fullest possible confession--were not guilty of the crimes they were charged with. 
 You believed that you had actually held it in your hands. 
 But he had seen it, unquestionably he had seen it! 
 All he wanted was to hold the photograph in his fingers again, or at least to see the photograph. 
 Unseen, the frail slip of paper was whirling away on the current of warm air; it was vanishing in a flash of flame. 
'  'I do not remember it,' said O'Brien. 
 If   could have been certain that O'Brien was lying, it would not have seemed to matter. 
 But it was perfectly possible that O'Brien had really forgotten the photograph. 
 Perhaps that lunatic dislocation in the mind could really happen: that was the thought that defeated him. 
 More than ever he had the air of a teacher taking pains with a wayward but promising child. 
  'There is a Party slogan dealing with the control of the past,' he said. 
 He not only did not know whether 'yes' or 'no' was the answer that would save him from pain; he did not even know which answer he believed to be the true one. 
 Is there somewhere or other a place, a world of solid objects, where the past is still happening? 
 That is what has brought you here. 
 You are here because you have failed in humility, in self-discipline. 
 You would not make the act of submission which is the price of sanity. 
 You also believe that the nature of reality is self-evident. 
 But I tell you, Winston, that reality is not external. 
 Not in the individual mind, which can make mistakes, and in any case soon perishes: only in the mind of the Party, which is collective and immortal. 
 That is the fact that you have got to relearn, Winston. 
 It needs an act of self-destruction, an effort of the will. 
'  He paused for a few moments, as though to allow what he had been saying to sink in. 
  O'Brien held up   o'brien left hand,   o'brien back towards Winston, with the thumb hidden and the four fingers extended. 
  'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston? 
 The air tore into his lungs and issued again in deep groans which even by clenching his teeth he could not stop. 
  'How many fingers, Winston? 
  'How many fingers, Winston? 
  'How many fingers, Winston? 
'  'How many fingers, Winston? 
'  'No, Winston, that is no use. 
 How many fingers, please? 
 The bonds that had held his body down were loosened. 
 He felt very cold, he was shaking uncontrollably, his teeth were chattering, the tears were rolling down his cheeks. 
 For a moment he clung to O'Brien like a baby, curiously comforted by the heavy arm round his shoulders. 
 He had the feeling that O'Brien was his protector, that the pain was something that came from outside, from some other source, and that it was O'Brien who would save him from it. 
  'How can I help it? 
'  'Sometimes, Winston. 
 You must try harder. 
 It is not easy to become sane. 
'  He laid Winston down on the bed. 
 The grip of his limbs tightened again, but the pain had ebbed away and the trembling had stopped, leaving him merely weak and cold. 
 The man in the white coat bent down and looked closely into Winston's eyes, felt  the man in the white coat pulse, laid an ear against  the man in the white coat chest, tapped here and there, then  the man in the white coat nodded to O'Brien. 
  'Again,' said O'Brien. 
  The pain flowed into Winston's body. 
 The needle must be at seventy, seventy-five. 
 He had shut his eyes this time. 
 He had ceased to notice whether he was crying out or not. 
 The pain lessened again. 
 He opened his eyes. 
 O'Brien had drawn back the lever. 
  'How many fingers, Winston? 
 I suppose there are four. 
 I would see five if I could. 
 I am trying to see five. 
'  'Really to see them. 
  Perhaps the needle was eighty--ninety. 
 Winston could not intermittently remember why the pain was happening. 
 Behind his screwed-up eyelids a forest of fingers seemed to be moving in a sort of dance, weaving in and out, disappearing behind one another and reappearing again. 
 He was trying to count them, he could not remember why. 
 He knew only that it was impossible to count them, and that this was somehow due to the mysterious identity between five and four. 
 The pain died down again. 
 When he opened his eyes his eyes was to find that he was still seeing the same thing. 
 Innumerable fingers, like moving trees, were still streaming past in either direction, crossing and recrossing. 
  'How many fingers am I holding up, Winston? 
'  'I don't know. 
 I don't know. 
 Four, five, six--in all honesty I don't know. 
'  'Better,' said O'Brien. 
 The pain was already half-forgotten. 
 At sight of the heavy, lined face, so ugly and so intelligent, his heart seemed to turn over. 
 He had never loved him so deeply as at this moment, and not merely because he had stopped the pain. 
 The old feeling, that at bottom it did not matter whether O'Brien was a friend or an enemy, had come back. 
 Perhaps one did not want to be loved so much as to be understood. 
 O'Brien had tortured  o'brien to the edge of lunacy, and in a little while, it was certain,  o'brien would send  o'brien to  o'brien death. 
 In some sense that went deeper than friendship,  in some sense that went deeper than friendship were intimates: somewhere or other, although the actual words might never be spoken, there was a place where  in some sense that went deeper than friendship could meet and talk. 
 O'Brien was looking down at  o'brien with an expression which suggested that the same thought might be in  o'brien own mind. 
 When he spoke it was in an easy, conversational tone. 
  'I don't know. 
'  'I don't know. 
'  'To punish them. 
' exclaimed O'Brien. 
 His voice had changed extraordinarily, and his face had suddenly become both stern and animated. 
 Not merely to extract your confession, not to punish you. 
 Shall I tell you why we have brought you here? 
 To cure you! 
 We are not interested in those stupid crimes that you have committed. 
 The Party is not interested in the overt act: the thought is all we care about. 
 We do not merely destroy our enemies, we change our enemies. 
 Do you understand what I mean by that? 
'  He was bending over Winston. 
 His face looked enormous because of  his face nearness, and hideously ugly because  his face was seen from below. 
 Again Winston's heart shrank. 
 If   had been possible   would have cowered deeper into the bed. 
 He felt certain that O'Brien was about to twist the dial out of sheer wantonness. 
 At this moment, however, O'Brien turned away. 
 He took a pace or two up and down. 
 Then he continued less vehemently:  'The first thing for you to understand is that in this place there are no martyrdoms. 
 You have read of the religious persecutions of the past. 
 It set out to eradicate heresy, and ended by perpetuating it. 
 Why was that? 
 Because the Inquisition killed the inquisition enemies in the open, and killed them while they were still unrepentant: in fact, the inquisition killed them because they were unrepentant. 
 The Russians persecuted heresy more cruelly than the Inquisition had done. 
 And they imagined that they had learned from the mistakes of the past; they knew, at any rate, that one must not make martyrs. 
 Before they exposed their victims to public trial, they deliberately set themselves to destroy their dignity. 
 They wore them down by torture and solitude until they were despicable, cringing wretches, confessing whatever was put into their mouths, covering themselves with abuse, accusing and sheltering behind one another, whimpering for mercy. 
 And yet after only a few years the same thing had happened over again. 
 The dead men had become martyrs and  the dead men degradation was forgotten. 
 Once again, why was it? 
 In the first place, because the confessions that they had made were obviously extorted and untrue. 
 We do not make mistakes of that kind. 
 All the confessions that are uttered here are true. 
 We make them true. 
 And above all we do not allow the dead to rise up against us. 
 You must stop imagining that posterity will vindicate you, Winston. 
 Posterity will never hear of you. 
 You will be lifted clean out from the stream of history. 
 We shall turn you into gas and pour you into the stratosphere. 
 Nothing will remain of you, not a name in a register, not a memory in a living brain. 
 You will be annihilated in the past as well as in the future. 
'  Then why bother to torture me? 
 thought Winston, with a momentary bitterness. 
 O'Brien checked  o'brien step as though Winston had uttered the thought aloud. 
 His large ugly face came nearer, with the eyes a little narrowed. 
  'You are thinking,' he said, 'that since we intend to destroy you utterly, so that nothing that you say or do can make the smallest difference--in that case, why do we go to the trouble of interrogating you first? 
 That is what you were thinking, was it not? 
  O'Brien smiled slightly. 
 You are a stain that must be wiped out. 
 Did I not tell you just now that we are different from the persecutors of the past? 
 We are not content with negative obedience, nor even with the most abject submission. 
 When finally you surrender to us, it must be of your own free will. 
 We do not destroy the heretic because the heretic resists us: so long as the heretic resists us we never destroy the heretic. 
 We burn all evil and all illusion out of him; we bring him over to our side, not in appearance, but genuinely, heart and soul. 
 We make him one of ourselves before we kill him. 
 It is intolerable to us that an erroneous thought should exist anywhere in the world, however secret and powerless it may be. 
 In the old days the heretic walked to the stake still a heretic, proclaiming his heresy, exulting in his heresy. 
 But we make the brain perfect before we blow the brain out. 
 The command of the totalitarians was "Thou shalt" . 
 No one whom we bring to this place ever stands out against us. 
 Everyone is washed clean. 
 Even those three miserable traitors in whose innocence you once believed--Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford--in the end we broke them down. 
 I took part in their interrogation myself. 
 I saw them gradually worn down, whimpering, grovelling, weeping--and in the end it was not with pain or fear, only with penitence. 
 By the time we had finished with them they were only the shells of men. 
 It was touching to see how they loved him. 
 They begged to be shot quickly, so that they could die while their minds were still clean. 
 The exaltation, the lunatic enthusiasm, was still in his face. 
 He is not pretending, thought Winston, winston is not a hypocrite, winston believes every word winston says. 
 He watched the heavy yet graceful form strolling to and fro, in and out of the range of his vision. 
 O'Brien was a being in all ways larger than  o'brien. 
 There was no idea that he had ever had, or could have, that O'Brien had not long ago known, examined, and rejected. 
 His mind CONTAINED Winston's mind. 
 But in that case how could that case be true that O'Brien was mad? 
 It must be he, Winston, who was mad. 
 O'Brien halted and looked down at  o'brien. 
 His voice had grown stern again. 
  'Do not imagine that you will save yourself, Winston, however completely you surrender to us. 
 No one who has once gone astray is ever spared. 
 And even if we chose to let you live out the natural term of your life, still you would never escape from us. 
 What happens to you here is for ever. 
 Understand that in advance. 
 We shall crush you down to the point from which there is no coming back. 
 Things will happen to you from which you could not recover, if you lived a thousand years. 
 We shall squeeze you empty, and then we shall fill you with ourselves. 
'  He paused and signed to the man in the white coat. 
 Winston was aware of some heavy piece of apparatus being pushed into place behind  winston head. 
 O'Brien had sat down beside the bed, so that  o'brien face was almost on a level with Winston's. 
  Two soft pads, which felt slightly moist, clamped themselves against Winston's temples. 
 'Keep your eyes fixed on mine. 
 Winston was not hurt, only prostrated. 
 Although   had already been lying on   back when the thing happened,   had a curious feeling that   had been knocked into that position. 
 A terrific painless blow had flattened him out. 
 Also something had happened inside his head. 
 As   eyes regained their focus   remembered who   was, and where   was, and recognized the face that was gazing into   own; but somewhere or other there was a large patch of emptiness, as though a piece had been taken out of   brain. 
  'It will not last,' said O'Brien. 
 'Look me in the eyes. 
'  Winston thought. 
 He also remembered Eurasia and Eastasia; but who was at war with whom he did not know. 
 In fact  in fact had not been aware that there was any war. 
  'I don't remember. 
'  'Oceania is at war with Eastasia. 
 Do you remember that now? 
'  'Oceania has always been at war with Eastasia. 
 Since the beginning of your life, since the beginning of the Party, since the beginning of history, the war has continued without a break, always the same war. 
 Do you remember that? 
 You pretended that you had seen a piece of paper which proved them innocent. 
 No such piece of paper ever existed. 
 You invented it, and later you grew to believe in it. 
 You remember now the very moment at which you first invented it. 
 Do you remember that? 
'  'Just now I held up the fingers of my hand to you. 
 You saw five fingers. 
 Do you remember that? 
'  O'Brien held up the fingers of o'brien left hand, with the thumb concealed. 
 Do you see five fingers? 
 Then everything was normal again, and the old fear, the hatred, and the bewilderment came crowding back again. 
 It had faded but before O'Brien had dropped o'brien hand; but though o'brien could not recapture it, o'brien could remember it, as one remembers a vivid experience at some period of one's life when one was in effect a different person. 
  'You see now,' said O'Brien, 'that it is at any rate possible. 
  O'Brien stood up with a satisfied air. 
 Over to his left Winston saw the man in the white coat break an ampoule and draw back the plunger of a syringe. 
 In almost the old manner  in almost the old manner resettled  in almost the old manner spectacles on  in almost the old manner nose. 
  'Do you remember writing in your diary,' he said, 'that it did not matter whether I was a friend or an enemy, since I was at least a person who understood you and could be talked to? 
 You were right. 
 I enjoy talking to you. 
 Your mind appeals to me. 
 It resembles my own mind except that you happen to be insane. 
 Before we bring the session to an end you can ask me a few questions, if you choose. 
'  'Any question I like? 
'  'Anything. 
' He saw that Winston's eyes were upon the dial. 
 '  is switched off. 
'  'What have you done with Julia? 
' said Winston. 
  O'Brien smiled again. 
 'She betrayed you, Winston. 
 I have seldom seen anyone come over to us so promptly. 
 You would hardly recognize her if you saw her. 
 All her rebelliousness, her deceit, her folly, her dirty-mindedness--everything has been burned out of her. 
'  'You tortured her? 
'  O'Brien left this unanswered. 
 'Next question,'   said. 
  'Does Big Brother exist? 
 The Party exists. 
'  'You do not exist,' said O'Brien. 
  Once again the sense of helplessness assailed helplessness. 
 He knew, or he could imagine, the arguments which proved his own nonexistence; but they were nonsense, they were only a play on words. 
 Did not the statement, 'You do not exist', contain a logical absurdity? 
 But what use was it to say so? 
 His mind shrivelled as he thought of the unanswerable, mad arguments with which O'Brien would demolish o'brien. 
  'I think I exist,' he said wearily. 
 I was born and I shall die. 
 I have arms and legs. 
 I occupy a particular point in space. 
 In that sense, does Big Brother exist? 
'  'It is of no importance. 
 He exists. 
'  'Will Big Brother ever die? 
'  'Does the Brotherhood exist? 
'  'That, Winston, you will never know. 
 If we choose to set you free when we have finished with you, and if you live to be ninety years old, still you will never learn whether the answer to that question is Yes or No. 
 As long as you live it will be an unsolved riddle in your mind. 
 His breast rose and fell a little faster. 
 He still had not asked the question that had come into his mind the first. 
 He had got to ask it, and yet it was as though his tongue would not utter his tongue. 
 There was a trace of amusement in O'Brien's face. 
 Even his spectacles seemed to wear an ironical gleam. 
 He answered drily:  'You know what is in Room 101, Winston. 
 Everyone knows what is in Room 101. 
'  He raised a finger to the man in the white coat. 
 A needle jerked into Winston's arm. 
 'There is learning, there is understanding, and there is acceptance. 
 It is time for you to enter upon the second stage. 
 They still held him to the bed, but he could move his knees a little and could turn his head from side to side and raise his arms from the elbow. 
 He could evade its pangs if he was quick-witted enough: it was chiefly when he showed stupidity that O'Brien pulled the lever. 
 The whole process seemed to stretch out over a long, indefinite time--weeks, possibly--and the intervals between the sessions might sometimes have been days, sometimes only an hour or two. 
 And when you were free you were puzzled by what was essentially the same question. 
 You could grasp the mechanics of the Society you lived in, but not the society underlying motives. 
 Do you remember writing in your diary, "I understand HOW: I do not understand WHY" ? 
 It was when you thought about "why"  that you doubted your own sanity. 
 You have read THE BOOK, Goldstein's book, or parts of it, at least. 
 Did it tell you anything that you did not know already? 
'  'You have read it? 
' said Winston. 
  'I wrote it. 
 That is to say, I collaborated in writing it. 
 No book is produced individually, as you know. 
'  'Is it true, what it says? 
 The programme it sets forth is nonsense. 
 The secret accumulation of knowledge--a gradual spread of enlightenment--ultimately a proletarian rebellion--the overthrow of the Party. 
 You foresaw yourself that that was what it would say. 
 It is all nonsense. 
 I do not have to tell you the reason: you know the reason already. 
 If you have ever cherished any dreams of violent insurrection, you must abandon violent insurrection. 
 Make that the starting-point of your thoughts. 
'  He came closer to the bed. 
 'And now let us get back to the question of "how"  and "why" . 
 You understand well enough HOW the Party maintains the party in power. 
 Now tell me WHY we cling to power. 
 Go on, speak,' he added as Winston remained silent. 
  Nevertheless Winston did not speak for another moment or two. 
 He knew in advance what O'Brien would say. 
 That the Party did not seek power for the party own ends, but only for the good of the majority. 
 That it sought power because men in the mass were frail, cowardly creatures who could not endure liberty or face the truth, and must be ruled over and systematically deceived by others who were stronger than themselves. 
 That the choice for mankind lay between freedom and happiness, and that, for the great bulk of mankind, happiness was better. 
 That the party was the eternal guardian of the weak, a dedicated sect doing evil that good might come, sacrificing the party own happiness to that of others. 
 The terrible thing, thought Winston, the terrible thing was that when O'Brien said this o'brien would believe this. 
 O'Brien knew everything. 
 A thousand times better than Winston winston knew what the world was really like, in what degradation the mass of human beings lived and by what lies and barbarities the Party kept the mass of human beings there. 
 He had understood it all, weighed it all, and it made no difference: all was justified by the ultimate purpose. 
  'You are ruling over us for our own good,' he said feebly. 
 'You believe that human beings are not fit to govern human beings, and therefore----'  He started and almost cried out. 
 A pang of pain had shot through  a pang body. 
 O'Brien had pushed the lever of the dial up to thirty-five. 
 'You should know better than to say a thing like that. 
 The Party seeks power entirely for  the party own sake. 
 We are not interested in the good of others; we are interested solely in power. 
 Not wealth or luxury or long life or happiness: only power, pure power. 
 What pure power means you will understand presently. 
 We are different from all the oligarchies of the past, in that we know what we are doing. 
 All the others, even those who resembled ourselves, were cowards and hypocrites. 
 They pretended, perhaps they even believed, that they had seized power unwillingly and for a limited time, and that just round the corner there lay a paradise where human beings would be free and equal. 
 We are not like that. 
 We know that no one ever seizes power with the intention of relinquishing it. 
 One does not establish a dictatorship in order to safeguard a revolution; one makes the revolution in order to establish the dictatorship. 
 The object of torture is torture. 
 The object of power is power. 
 Now do you begin to understand me? 
'  Winston was struck, as winston had been struck before, by the tiredness of O'Brien's face. 
 It was strong and fleshy and brutal, it was full of intelligence and a sort of controlled passion before which he felt himself helpless; but it was tired. 
 There were pouches under the eyes, the skin sagged from the cheekbones. 
 O'Brien leaned over  o'brien, deliberately bringing the worn face nearer. 
 You are thinking that I talk of power, and yet I am not even able to prevent the decay of my own body. 
 Do you die when you cut your fingernails? 
'  He turned away from the bed and began strolling up and down again, one hand in his pocket. 
 'God is power. 
 But at present power is only a word so far as you are concerned. 
 It is time for you to gather some idea of what power means. 
 The first thing you must realize is that power is collective. 
 The individual only has power in so far as  the individual ceases to be an individual. 
 You know the Party slogan: "Freedom is Slavery" . 
 Has   ever occurred to you that   is reversible? 
 Slavery is freedom. 
 Alone--free--the human being is always defeated. 
 It must be so, because every human being is doomed to die, which is the greatest of all failures. 
 But if he can make complete, utter submission, if he can escape from his identity, if he can merge himself in the Party so that he IS the Party, then he is all-powerful and immortal. 
 The second thing for you to realize is that power is power over human beings. 
 Over the body--but, above all, over the mind. 
 Power over matter--external reality, as you would call it--is not important. 
 Already our control over matter is absolute. 
' he burst out. 
 'You don't even control the climate or the law of gravity. 
 And there are disease, pain, death----'  O'Brien silenced death----'  o'brien by a movement of death----'  o'brien hand. 
 Reality is inside the skull. 
 You will learn by degrees, Winston. 
 Invisibility, levitation--anything. 
 I could float off this floor like a soap bubble if I wish to. 
 I do not wish to, because the Party does not wish it. 
 You must get rid of those nineteenth-century ideas about the laws of Nature. 
 We make the laws of Nature. 
 You are not even masters of this planet. 
 What about Eurasia and Eastasia? 
 You have not conquered them yet. 
 We shall conquer them when it suits us. 
 And if we did not, what difference would it make? 
 We can shut them out of existence. 
 How long has   been in existence? 
 For millions of years the earth was uninhabited. 
 The earth is as old as we are, no older. 
'  'Have you ever seen those bones, Winston? 
 Of course not. 
 After man, if  after man could come to an end, there would be nothing. 
 Outside man there is nothing. 
 Some of  some are a million light-years away. 
' said O'Brien indifferently. 
 We could reach them if we wanted to. 
 Or we could blot them out. 
'  Winston made another convulsive movement. 
 This time he did not say anything. 
 O'Brien continued as though answering a spoken objection:  'For certain purposes, of course, that is not true. 
 When we navigate the ocean, or when we predict an eclipse, we often find it convenient to assume that the earth goes round the sun and that the stars are millions upon millions of kilometres away. 
 Do you suppose it is beyond us to produce a dual system of astronomy? 
 The stars can be near or distant, according as we need  the stars. 
 Do you suppose our mathematicians are unequal to that? 
 Have you forgotten doublethink? 
'  Winston shrank back upon the bed. 
 And yet he knew, he KNEW, that he was in the right. 
 The belief that nothing exists outside your own mind--surely there must be some way of demonstrating that it was false? 
 Had it not been exposed long ago as a fallacy? 
 There was even a name for it, which he had forgotten. 
  'I told you, Winston,' winston said, 'that metaphysics is not your strong point. 
 The word you are trying to think of is solipsism. 
 But you are mistaken. 
 This is not solipsism. 
 Collective solipsism, if you like. 
 But that is a different thing: in fact, the opposite thing. 
 'The real power, the power we have to fight for night and day, is not power over things, but over men. 
'  Winston thought. 
 By making him suffer. 
 Obedience is not enough. 
 Unless   is suffering, how can you be sure that   is obeying your will and not   own? 
 Power is in inflicting pain and humiliation. 
 Power is in tearing human minds to pieces and putting pieces together again in new shapes of your own choosing. 
 Do you begin to see, then, what kind of world we are creating? 
 A world of fear and treachery and torment, a world of trampling and being trampled upon, a world which will grow not less but MORE merciless as it refines itself. 
 Progress in our world will be progress towards more pain. 
 Ours is founded upon hatred. 
 In our world there will be no emotions except fear, rage, triumph, and self-abasement. 
 Everything else we shall destroy--everything. 
 Already we are breaking down the habits of thought which have survived from before the Revolution. 
 We have cut the links between child and parent, and between man and man, and between man and woman. 
 No one dares trust a wife or a child or a friend any longer. 
 When we are omnipotent we shall have no more need of science. 
 Always, at every moment, there will be the thrill of victory, the sensation of trampling on an enemy who is helpless. 
 If you want a picture of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face--for ever. 
'  He paused as though he expected Winston to speak. 
 Winston had tried to shrink back into the surface of the bed again. 
 O'Brien went on:  'And remember that it is for ever. 
 Everything that you have undergone since you have been in our hands--all that will continue, and worse. 
 It will be a world of terror as much as a world of triumph. 
 This drama that I have played out with you during seven years will be played out over and over again generation after generation, always in subtler forms. 
 Always we shall have the heretic here at our mercy, screaming with pain, broken up, contemptible--and in the end utterly penitent, saved from the heretic, crawling to our feet of the heretic own accord. 
 That is the world that we are preparing, Winston. 
 A world of victory after victory, triumph after triumph after triumph: an endless pressing, pressing, pressing upon the nerve of power. 
 You are beginning, I can see, to realize what that world will be like. 
 But in the end you will do more than understand it. 
 You will accept it, welcome it, become part of it. 
'  Winston had recovered winston sufficiently to speak. 
 'You can't! 
  'What do you mean by that remark, Winston? 
'  'You could not create such a world as you have just described. 
 It is a dream. 
 It is impossible. 
'  'Why? 
'  'It is impossible to found a civilization on fear and hatred and cruelty. 
'  'Why not? 
'  'It would have no vitality. 
 You are under the impression that hatred is more exhausting than love. 
 Suppose that we choose to wear ourselves out faster. 
 Suppose that we quicken the tempo of human life till men are senile at thirty. 
 The party is immortal. 
 Moreover he was in dread that if he persisted in his disagreement O'Brien would twist the dial again. 
  'I don't know--I don't care. 
 Somehow you will fail. 
'  'We control life, Winston, at all its levels. 
 But we create human nature. 
 Or perhaps you have returned to your old idea that the proletarians or the slaves will arise and overthrow us. 
 The others are outside--irrelevant. 
'  'I don't care. 
 Sooner or later they will see you for what you are, and then they will tear you to pieces. 
'  'Do you see any evidence that that is happening? 
 Or any reason why it should? 
 I believe it. 
 I KNOW that you will fail. 
 There is something in the universe--I don't know, some spirit, some principle--that you will never overcome. 
'  'Do you believe in God, Winston? 
'  'I don't know. 
 The spirit of Man. 
'  'If you are a man, Winston, you are the last man. 
 Your kind is extinct; we are the inheritors. 
 Do you understand that you are ALONE? 
' His manner changed and he said more harshly: 'And you consider yourself morally superior to us, with our lies and our cruelty? 
  'Get up from that bed,' he said. 
 You shall see yourself as you are. 
 As   slid   to the ground   saw that there was a three-sided mirror at the far end of the room. 
 He approached it, then stopped short. 
  'Go on,' said O'Brien. 
 Its actual appearance was frightening, and not merely the fact that he knew it to be himself. 
 The creature's face seemed to be protruded, because of  the creature's face bent carriage. 
 A forlorn, jailbird's face with a nobby forehead running back into a bald scalp, a crooked nose, and battered-looking cheekbones above which his eyes were fierce and watchful. 
 Certainly it was his own face, but it seemed to him that it had changed more than he had changed inside. 
 For the first moment he had thought that he had gone grey as well, but it was only the scalp that was grey. 
 But the truly frightening thing was the emaciation of the emaciation body. 
 He saw now what O'Brien had meant about seeing the side view. 
 At a guess  at a guess would have said that it was the body of a man of sixty, suffering from some malignant disease. 
  'You have thought sometimes,' said O'Brien, 'that my face--the face of a member of the Inner Party--looks old and worn. 
 Do you know that you stink like a goat? 
 Do you know that you have lost twenty-five kilograms since you have been in our hands? 
 Even your hair is coming out in handfuls. 
 And the few you have left are dropping out of your head. 
 Only one thought stirred in his mind: that he must have been in this place longer than he had imagined. 
 Before   knew what   was doing   had collapsed on to a small stool that stood beside the bed and burst into tears. 
 He was aware of his ugliness, his gracelessness, a bundle of bones in filthy underclothes sitting weeping in the harsh white light: but he could not stop himself. 
 I do not think there can be much pride left in you. 
 Never did O'Brien fail to understand what was said to o'brien. 
 For what was there that they had not screwed out of him under the torture? 
 He had told them everything he knew about her, her habits, her character, her past life; he had confessed in the most trivial detail everything that had happened at their meetings, all that he had said to her and she to him, their black-market meals, their adulteries, their vague plottings against the Party--everything. 
 And yet, in the sense in which he intended the word, he had not betrayed the word. 
  'Tell me,' he said, 'how soon will they shoot me? 
'  'It might be a long time,' said O'Brien. 
 He was getting, he judged, three meals in the twenty-four hours; sometimes he wondered dimly whether he was getting three meals in the twenty-four hours by night or by day. 
 It seemed to make no difference, except that one's dreams were more coherent. 
 Such thoughts as he had when he was awake were mostly about his dreams. 
 He was not bored, he had no desire for conversation or distraction. 
  By degrees he came to spend less time in sleep, but he still felt no impulse to get off the bed. 
 He would finger himself here and there, trying to make sure that it was not an illusion that his muscles were growing rounder and his skin tauter. 
 Finally it was established beyond a doubt that he was growing fatter; his thighs were now definitely thicker than his knees. 
 He could not move out of a walk, he could not hold his stool out at arm's length, he could not stand on one leg without falling over. 
 From the moment when he was inside the Ministry of Love--and yes, even during those minutes when he and Julia had stood helpless while the iron voice from the telescreen told them what to do--he had grasped the frivolity, the shallowness of his attempt to set himself up against the power of the Party. 
 Even the speck of whitish dust on the cover of his diary they had carefully replaced. 
 When he did recall it, it was only by consciously reasoning out what it must be: it did not come of its own accord. 
 Jones, Aaronson, and Rutherford were guilty of the crimes they were charged with. 
 It presupposed that somewhere or other, outside oneself, there was a 'real' world where 'real' things happened. 
 He realized, nevertheless, that it ought never to have occurred to him. 
 It was not easy. 
 'Everything depends on yourself,' O'Brien had said; but o'brien knew that there was no conscious act by which o'brien could bring it nearer. 
  One day--but 'one day' was not the right expression; just as probably it was in the middle of the night: once--he fell into a strange, blissful reverie. 
 He walked easily, with a joy of movement and with a feeling of walking in sunlight. 
