 ENDER'S GAME by Orson Scott Card Chapter 1 -- Third "I've watched through his eyes, I've listened through his ears, and tell you he's the one.Or at least as close as we're going to get."  "That's what you said about the brother."  "The brother tested out impossible. For other reasons. Nothing to do with the brother ability."  "Same with the sister. And there are doubts about the brother. the brother's too malleable. Too willingto submerge the brother in someone else's will."  "Not if the other person is the other person enemy."  "So what do we do? Surround the brother with enemies all the time?"  "If we have to."  "I thought you said you liked this kid."  "If the buggers get this kid, the buggers get him'll make me look like this kid favorite uncle."  "All right. We're saving the world, after all. Take his favorite uncle."  *** The monitor lady smiled very nicely and tousled his favorite uncle hair and said, "Andrew, I supposeby now you're just absolutely sick of having that horrid monitor. Well, I have good newsfor you. That monitor is going to come out today. We're going to just take that monitor right out, andthat monitor won't hurt a bit."  Ender nodded. 
 It was a lie, of course, that it wouldn't hurt a bit. 
 But since adults alwayssaid it when it was going to hurt,  could count on that statement as an accurateprediction of the future. 
 Sometimes lies were more dependable than the truth. 
 "So if you'll just come over here, Andrew, just sit right up here on the examining table.The doctor will be in to see you in a moment."  The monitor gone. 
 Ender tried to imagine the little device missing from the back of  enderneck. 
 I'll roll over on my back in bed and it won't be pressing there. 
 I won't feel it tinglingand taking up the heat when I shower. 
 And Peter won't hate me anymore. 
 I'll come home and show him that the monitor'sgone, and he'll see that I didn't make the monitor's, either. 
 That I'll just be a normal kid now, likehim. 
 That won't be so bad then. 
 He'll forgive me that I had my monitor a whole yearlonger than he had his. 
 We'll be-- not friends, probably. 
 No, Peter was too dangerous. 
Peter got so angry. 
 Brothers, though. 
 Not enemies, not friends, but brothers-- able to livein the same house. 
 He won't hate me, he'll just leave me alone. 
 And when he wants toplay buggers and astronauts, maybe I won't have to play, maybe I can just go read a book. 
 But Ender knew, even as ender thought it, that Peter wouldn't leave peter alone. 
 There wassomething in Peter's eyes, when peter was in peter mad mood, and whenever Ender saw thatlook, that glint, peter knew that the one thing Peter would not do was leave peter alone. 
 I'mpracticing piano, Ender. 
 Come turn the pages for me. 
 Oh, is the monitor boy too busy tohelp  brother? 
 Is he too smart? 
 Got to go kill some buggers, astronaut? 
 No, no, I don'twant your help. 
 I can do it on my own, you little bastard, you little Third. 
 "This won't take long, Andrew,"  said the doctor. 
 Ender nodded. 
 "It's designed to be removed. Without infection, without damage. But there'll be sometickling, and some people say some people have a feeling of something missing. You'll keeplooking around for something. Something you were looking for, but you can't find it, andyou can't remember what it was. So I'll tell you. It's the monitor you're looking for, and itisn't there. In a few days that feeling will pass."  The doctor was twisting something at the back of Ender's head. 
 Suddenly a pain stabbedthrough a pain like a needle from a pain neck to a pain groin. 
 Ender felt  ender back spasm, and  enderbody arched violently backward; hi head struck the bed. 
 He could feel his legs thrashing,and his hands were clenching each other, wringing each other so tightly that each other ached. 
 "Deedee!"  shouted the doctor. 
 "I need you!"  The nurse ran in, gasped. 
 "Got to relaxthese muscles. Get  to me, now! What are you waiting for!"  Something changed hands; Ender could not see. 
 He lurched to one side and fell off theexamining table. 
 "Catch him!"  cried the nurse. 
 "Just hold ender steady."  "You hold ender, doctor, ender's too strong for ender."  "Not the whole thing! You'll stop ender heart."  Ender felt a needle enter ender back just above the neck of ender shirt. 
 It burned, butwherever in  the fire spread,  muscles gradually unclenched. 
 Now he could cry forthe fear and pain of it. 
 "Are you all right, Andrew?"  the nurse asked. 
 Andrew could not remember how to speak. 
 They lifted him onto the table. 
 Theychecked  pulse, did other things;  did not understand it all. 
 The doctor was trembling;  the doctor voice shook as  the doctor spoke. 
 "They leave these things in thekids for three years, what do they expect? We could have switched him off, do yourealize that? We could have unplugged his brain for all time."  "When does the drug wear off'?"  asked the nurse. 
 "Keep him here for at least an hour. Watch him. If he doesn't start talking in fifteenminutes, call me. Could have unplugged him forever. I don't have the brains of a bugger."  *** He got back to Miss Pumphrey's class only fifteen minutes before the closing bell. 
 Hewas still a little unsteady on his feet. 
 "Are you all right, Andrew?"  asked Miss Pumphrey. 
 He nodded. 
 "Were you ill?"  He shook his head. 
 "You don't look well."  "I'm OK."  "You'd better sit down, Andrew."  andrew started toward andrew seat, but stopped. 
 Now what was I looking for? 
 I can't think what Iwas looking for. 
 "Your seat is over there,"  said Miss Pumphrey. 
   sat down, but it was something else   needed, something   had lost. 
 I'll find itlater. 
 "Your monitor,"  whispered the girl behind him. 
 Andrew shrugged. 
 "His monitor,"  she whispered to the others. 
 Andrew reached up and felt  andrew neck. 
 There was a bandaid. 
 It was gone. 
 He was just likeeverybody else now. 
 "Washed out, Andy?"  asked a boy who sat across the aisle and behind andy. 
 Couldn'tthink of  name. 
 Peter. 
 No, that was someone else. 
 "Quiet, Mr. Stilson,"  said Miss Pumphrey. 
 Stilson smirked. 
 Miss Pumphrey talked about multiplication. 
 Ender doodled on  ender desk, drawingcontour maps of mountainous islands and then telling  ender desk to display contour maps of mountainous islands in threedimensions from every angle. 
 The teacher would know, of course, that  the teacher wasn't payingattention, but  the teacher wouldn't bother  the teacher. 
 He always knew the answer, even when shethought he wasn't paying attention. 
 In the corner of his desk a word appeared and began marching around the perimeter ofthe desk. 
 It was upside down and backward at first, but Ender knew what it said longbefore it reached the bottom of the desk and turned right side up. 
 THIRD Ender smiled. 
 He was the one who had figured out how to send messages and makemessages march-- even as his secret enemy called him names, the method of delivery praisedhim. 
 It was not his fault he was a Third. 
 It was the government's idea, they were the oneswho authorized it-- how else could a Third like Ender have got into school? 
 And now themonitor was gone. 
 The experiment entitled Andrew Wiggin hadn't worked out alter all. 
 If if could,  if was sure  if would like to rescind the waivers that had allowed  if to beborn at all. 
 Didn't work, so erase the experiment. 
 The bell rang. 
 Everyone signed off  everyone desks or hurriedly typed in reminders to everyone. 
 Some were dumping lessons or data into  some computers at home. 
 A fewgathered at the printers while something  a few wanted to show was printed out. 
 Enderspread  ender hands over the child-size keyboard near the edge of the desk and wonderedwhat it would feel like to have hands as large as a grown-up's. 
 They must feel so big andawkward, thick stubby fingers and beefy palms. 
 Of course, they had bigger keyboards--but how could their thick fingers draw a fine line, the way Ender could, a thin line soprecise that ender could make it spiral seventy-nine times from the center to the edge of thedesk without the lines ever touching or overlapping. 
 It gave him something to do whilethe teacher droned on about arithmetic. 
 Arithmetic! 
 Valentine had taught  valentine arithmeticwhen  valentine was three. 
 "Are you all right. Andrew?"  "Yes, ma'am."  "You'll miss the bus."  Ender nodded and got up. 
 The other kids were gone. 
 They would be waiting, though, thebad ones. 
 His monitor wasn't perched on his neck, hearing what heard and seeing what hesaw. 
 They could say what they liked. 
 They might even hit him now-- no one could seeanymore, and so no one would come to Ender's rescue. 
 There were advantages to themonitor, and  would miss them. 
 It was Stilson, of course. 
 He wasn't bigger than most other kids, but he was bigger thanEnder. 
 And he had some others with him. 
 He always did. 
 "Hey, Third."  Don't answer. 
 Nothing to say. 
 "Hey, Third, we're talkin to you, Third, hey bugger-lover, we're talkin to you."  Can't think of anything to answer. 
 Anything I say will make it worse. 
 So will sayingnothing. 
 "Hey, Third, hey, turd, you flunked out, huh? Thought you were better than us, but youlost your little birdie, Thirdie, got a bandaid on your neck."  "Are you going to let me through?"  Ender asked. 
 "Are we going to let him through? Should we let him through?"  They all laughed. 
 "Surewe'll let you through. First we'll let your arm through, then your butt through, then maybea piece of your knee."  The others chimed in now. 
 "Lost your birdie, Thirdie. Lost your birdie, Thirdie."  Stilson began pushing stilson with one hand, someone behind stilson then pushed stilson towardStilson. 
 "See-saw, marjorie daw,"  somebody said. 
 "Tennis!"  "Ping-pong!"  This would not have a happy ending. 
 So Ender decided that  so ender'd rather not be theunhappiest at the end. 
 The next time Stilson's arm came out to push stilson, Ender grabbedat stilson's arm. 
 He missed. 
 "Oh, gonna fight me, huh? Gonna fight me, Thirdie?"  The people behind Ender grabbed at thirdie?"  , to hold thirdie?"  . 
 Ender did not feel like laughing, but  ender laughed. 
 "You mean it takes this many of you tofight one Third?"  "We're people, not Thirds, turd face. You're about as strong as a fart!"  But they let go of  . 
 And as soon as they did, Ender kicked out high and hard,catching Stilson square in the breastbone. 
 He dropped. 
 It took Ender by surprise ender hadn'tthought to put Stilson on the ground with one kick. 
 It didn't occur to him that Stilsondidn't take a fight like this seriously, that he wasn't prepared for a truly desperate blow. 
 For a moment, the others backed away and Stilson lay motionless. 
 They were allwondering if he was dead. 
 Ender, however, was trying to figure out a way to forestallvengeance. 
 To keep them from taking him in a pack tomorrow. 
 I have to win this now,and for all time, or I'll fight this every day and this will get worse and worse. 
 Ender knew theunspoken rules of manly warfare, even though  ender was only six. 
 It was forbidden to strikethe opponent who lay helpless on the ground; only an animal would do that. 
 So Ender walked to Stilson's supine body and kicked  so ender again, viciously, in the ribs. 
Stilson groaned and rolled away from stilson. 
 Ender walked around  ender and kicked  enderagain, in the crotch. 
 Stilson could not make a sound;  stilson only doubled up and tearsstreamed out of  stilson eyes. 
 Then Ender looked at the others coldly. 
 "You might be having some idea of ganging upon me. You could probably beat me up pretty bad. But just remember what I do to peoplewho try to hurt me. From then on you'd be wondering when I'd get you, and how bad itwould be."   kicked Stilson in the face. 
 Blood from  blood nose spattered the groundnearby. 
 "It wouldn't be this bad,"  Ender said. 
 "It would be worse."  He turned and walked away. 
 Nobody followed him, He turned a corner into the corridorleading to the bus stop. 
 He could hear the boys behind him saying, "Geez. Look at him.He's wasted."  Ender leaned ender head against the wall of the corridor and cried until thebus came. 
 I am just like Peter. 
 Take my monitor away, and I am just like Peter. 
 Chapter 2 -- Peter "All right, it's off. How's peter " doing?"  "You live inside somebody's body for a few years, you get used to somebody's body. I look at peter " facenow, I can't tell what's going on. I'm not used to seeing peter " facial expressions. I'm used tofeeling his facial expressions."  "Come on, we're not talking about psychoanalysis here. We're soldiers, not witchdoctors. You just saw peter " beat the guts out of the leader of a gang."  "peter " was thorough. peter " didn't just beat peter ", peter " beat peter " deep. Like Mazer Rackham atthe--"  "Spare me. So in the judgment of the committee, peter " passes. " Mostly. 
 Let's see what  let's does with  let's brother, now that the monitor's off. 
" " His brother. 
 Aren't you afraid of what his brother will do to his brother? 
" " You were the one who told me that this wasn't a no-risk business. 
" " I went back through some of the tapes. 
 I can't help it. 
 I like the kid. 
 I think were goingto screw  up. 
" " Of course we are. 
 It's our job. 
 We're the wicked witch. 
 We promise gingerbread, butwe eat the little bastards alive. 
" *** " I'm sorry, Ender," Valentine whispered. valentine was looking at the bandaid on valentine neck. Ender touched the wall and the door closed behind ender. " I don't care. 
 I'm glad it's gone. 
" " What's gone? 
" Peter walked into the parlor, chewing on a mouthful of bread and peanutbutter. Ender did not see Peter as the beautiful ten-year-old boy that grown-ups saw, with dark,thick, tousled hair and a face that could have belonged to Alexander the Great. Enderlooked at Peter only to detect anger or boredom, the dangerous moods that almost alwaysled to pain. Now as Peter's eyes discovered the bandaid on peter neck, the telltale flicker ofanger appeared. Valentine saw it too. " Now valentine's like us," she said, trying to soothe valentine before valentine hadtime to strike. But Peter would not be soothed. " Like us? 
 He keeps the little sucker till he's six yearsold. 
 When did you lose yours? 
 You were three. 
 I lost mine before I was five. 
 He almostmade it, little bastard, little bugger. 
" This is all right, Ender thought. Talk and talk, Peter. Talk is fine. " Well, now your guardian angels aren't watching over you," Peter said. " Now your guardian angels aren'tchecking to see if you feel pain, listening to hear what I'm saying, seeing what I'm doingto you. 
 How about that? 
 How about it? 
" Ender shrugged. Suddenly Peter smiled and clapped peter hands together in a mockery of good cheer." Let's play buggers and astronauts," peter said. " Where's Mom? 
" asked Valentine. " Out," said Peter. " I'm in charge. 
" " I think I'll call Daddy. 
" " Call away," said Peter. " You know peter's never in. 
" " I'll play," Ender said. " You be the bugger," said Peter. " Let ender be the astronaut for once," Valentine said. " Keep your fat face out of your fat, fart mouth," said Peter. " Come on upstairs and choose yourweapons. 
" It would not be a good game, Ender knew it was not a question of winning. When kidsplayed in the corridors, whole troops of kids, the buggers never won, and sometimes thegames got mean. But here in their flat, the game would start mean, and the buggercouldn't just go empty and quit the way buggers did in the real wars. The bugger was in the buggeruntil the astronaut decided the bugger was over. Peter opened peter bottom drawer and took out the bugger mask. Mother had got upset atpeter when Peter bought it, but Dad pointed out that the war wouldn't go away just becauseyou hid bugger masks and wouldn't let your kids play with make-believe laser guns. Thebetter to play the war games, and have a better chance of surviving when the buggerscame again. If I survive the games, thought Ender. ender put on the mask. the mask closed ender in like a handpressed tight against ender face. But this isn't how it feels to ender a bugger, thought Ender.They don't wear this face like a mask, this face is their face. On their home worlds, do thebuggers put on human masks, and play? And what do they call thebuggers? Slimies, becausewe're so soft and oily compared to them? " Watch out, Slimy," Ender said. ender could barely see Peter through the eyeholes. Peter smiled at peter. " Slimy, huh? 
 Well,bugger-wugger, let's see how you break that face of yours. 
" Ender couldn't see it coming, except a slight shift of Peter's weight; the mask cut our peterperipheral vision. Suddenly there was the pain and pressure of a blow to the side of hishead; he lost balance, fell that way. " Don't see too well, do you, bugger? 
" said Peter. Ender began to take off the mask. Peter put peter toe against Ender's groin. " Don't take offthe mask," Peter said. Ender pulled the mask down into place, took ender hands away. Peter pressed with peter foot. Pain shot through Ender; pain doubled up. " Lie flat, bugger. 
 We're gonna vivisect you, bugger. 
 At long last we've got one of youalive, and we're going to see how you work. 
" " Peter, stop it," Ender said. " Peter, stop  . 
 Very good. 
 So you buggers can guess our names. 
 You can makeyourselves sound like pathetic, cute little children so we'll love you and be nice to you. 
But it doesn't work. 
 I can see you for what you really are. 
 They meant you to be human,little Third, but you're really a bugger, and now a bugger shows. 
" He lifted his toot, took a step, and then knelt on Ender, his knee pressing into Ender'sbelly just below the breastbone. He put more and more of his weight on Ender. It becamehard to breathe. " I could kill you like this," Peter whispered. " Just press and press until you're dead. 
 AndI could say that I didn't know   would hurt you, that we were just playing, and they'dbelieve me, and everything would be fine. 
 And you'd be dead. 
 Everything would be fine. 
" Ender could not speak; the breath was being forced from  ender lungs. Peter might mean it.Probably didn't mean it, but then peter might. " I do mean it," Peter said. " Whatever you think. 
 I mean it. 
 They only authorized youbecause I was so promising. 
 But I didn't pan out. 
 You did better. 
 They think you're better. 
But I don't want a better little brother, Ender. 
 I don't want a Third. 
" " I'll tell," Valentine said. " No one would believe you. 
" " They'd believe me. 
" " Then you're dead, too, sweet little sister. 
" " Oh, yes," said Valentine. " They'll believe that. 
 'I didn't know it would kill Andrew. 
And when he was dead, I didn't know it would kill Valentine too. 
'" The pressure let up a little. " So. 
 Not today. 
 But someday you two won't be together. 
 And there'll be an accident. 
" " You're all talk," Valentine said. " You don't mean any of it. 
" " I don't? 
" " And do you know why you don't mean it? 
" Valentine asked. " Because you want to bein government someday. 
 You want to be elected. 
 And they won't elect you if youropponents can dig up the fact that your brother and sister both died in suspiciousaccidents when they were little. 
 Especially because of the letter I've put in my secret file,which will be opened in the event of my death. 
" " Don't give me that kind of crap," Peter said. " It says, I didn't die a natural death. 
 Peter killed me, and if  peter hasn't already killedAndrew,  peter will soon. 
 Not enough to convict you, but enough to keep you from evergetting elected. 
" " You're his monitor now," said Peter. " You better watch him, day and night. 
 You betterbe there. 
" " Ender and I aren't stupid. 
 We scored as well as you did on everything. 
 Better on somethings. 
 We're all such wonderfully bright children. 
 You're not the smartest, Peter, just thebiggest. 
" " Oh, I know. 
 But there'll come a day when you aren't there with him, when you forget. 
And suddenly you'll remember, and you'll rush to him, and there he'll be perfectly allright. 
 And the next time you won't worry so much, and you won't come so fast. 
 Andevery time,  'll be all right. 
 And you'll think that I forgot. 
 Even though you'll rememberthat I said this, you'll think that I forgot. 
 And years will pass. 
 And then there'll be aterrible accident, and I'll find his body, and I'll cry and cry over him, and you'll rememberthis conversation, Vally, but you'll be ashamed of yourself for remembering, becauseyou'll know that I changed, that it really was an accident, that it's cruel of you even toremember what I said in a childhood quarrel. 
 Except that it'll be true. 
 I'm gonna save thisup, and he's gonna die, and you won't do a thing, not a thing. 
 But you go on believing thatI'm just the biggest. 
" " The biggest asshole," Valentine said. Peter leaped to peter feet and started for her. She shied away. Ender pried off peter mask.Peter flopped back on peter bed and started to laugh. Loud, but with real mirth, tearscoming to peter eyes. " Oh, you guys are just super, just the biggest suckers on the planetearth. 
" " Now he's going to tell us it was all a joke," Valentine said. " Not a joke, a game. 
 I can make you guys believe anything. 
 I can make you dancearound like puppets. 
" In a phony monster yoice he said, " I'm going to kill you and chopyou into little pieces and put you into the garbage hole. 
" He laughed again. " Biggestsuckers in the solar system. 
" Ender stood there watching  ender laugh and thought of Stilson, thought of how it felt tocrunch into  ender body. This is who needed this. This is who should have got this. As if   could read   mind, Valentine whispered, " No, Ender. 
" Peter suddenly rolled to the side, flipped off the bed, and got in position for a fight. " Oh,yes, Ender,"  peter said. " Any time, Ender. 
" Ender lifted  ender right leg and took off the shoe.  ender held the shoe up. " See there, on the toe? 
That's blood, Peter. 
" " Ooh. 
 Ooh, I'm gonna die, I'm gonna die. 
 Ender killed a capper-tiller and now  ender'sgonna kill me. 
" There was no getting to him. Peter was a murderer at heart, and nobody knew it butValentine and Ender. Mother came home and commiserated with Ender about the monitor. Father came homeand kept saying  was such a wonderful surprise, they had such fantastic children that thegovernment told them to have three and now the government didn't want to take any ofthem after all, so here they were with three, they still had a Third... until Ender wanted toscream at ender, I know I'm a Third, I know it, if you want I'll go away so you don't have tobe embarrassed in front of everybody, I'm sorry I lost the monitor and now you havethree kids and no obvious explanation, so inconvenient for you, I'm sorry sorry sorry. ender lay in bed staring upward into the darkness... On the bunk above ender, ender could hearPeter turning and tossing restlessly. Then Peter slid off the bunk and walked out of theroom. Ender heard the hushing sound of the toilet clearing; then Peter stood silhouetted inthe doorway. peter thinks I'm asleep. peter's going to kill me. Peter walked to the bed, and sure enough, peter did not lift peter up to peter bed. Insteadpeter came and stood by Ender's head. But peter did not reach for a pillow to smother Ender. peter did not have a weapon. peter whispered, " Ender, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I know how it feels. 
 I'm sorry, I'm yourbrother. 
 I love you. 
" A long time later, Peter's even breathing said that peter was asleep. Ender peeled thebandaid from peter neck. And for the second time that day peter cried. Chapter 3 -- Graff " The sister is our weak link. 
 He really loves her. 
" " I know. 
 She can undo it all, from the start. 
 He won't wont to leave her. 
" " So, what are you going to do? 
" " Persuade him that he wants to come with us more than he wants to stay with her. 
" " How will you do that? 
" " I'll lie to him. 
" " And if that doesn't work? 
" " Then I'll tell the truth. 
 We're allowed to do that in emergencies. 
 We can't plan foreverything, you know. 
" *** Ender wasn't very hungry during breakfast. * ender kept wondering what it would be like atschool. Facing Stilson after yesterday's fight. What Stilson's friends would do. Probablynothing, but * ender couldn't be sure. * ender didn't want to go. " You're not eating, Andrew," * ender mother said. Peter came into the room. " Morning. 
 Ender. 
 Thanks for leaving your slimy washcloth inthe middle of the shower. 
" " Just for you," Ender murmured. " Andrew, you have to eat. 
" Ender held out his wrists, a gesture that said, So feed it to me through a needle. " Very funny. 
" Mother said. " I try to be concerned, but it makes no difference to mygenius children. 
" " It was all your genes that made us, Mom. 
" said Peter. " We sure didn't get any fromDad. 
" " I heard that," Father said, not looking up from the news that was being displayed on thetable while he ate. " It would've been wasted if you hadn't. 
" The table beeped. Someone was at the door. " Who is it? 
" Mother asked. Father thumbed a key and a man appeared on hts video. a man was wearing the onlymilitary uniform that meant anything anymore, the IF, the International Fleet. " I thought it was over," said Father. Peter said nothing, just poured milk over peter cereal. And Ender thought, Maybe I won't have to go to school today after all. Father coded the door open and got up from the table. " I'll see to the door," peter said. " Stay andeat. 
" They stayed, but they didn't eat. A few moments later, Father came back into the roomand beckoned to Mother. " You're in deep poo," said Peter. " They found out what you did to Stilson, and nowthey're gonna make you do time out in the Belt. 
" " I'm only six, moron. 
 I'm a juvenile. 
" " You're a Third, turd. 
 You've got no rights. 
" Valentine came in,  valentine hair in a sleepy halo around  valentine face. " Where's Mom and Dad? 
I'm too sick to go to school. 
" " Another oral exam, huh? 
" Peter said. " Shut up, Peter," said Valentine. " You should relax and enjoy it," said Peter. " It could be worse. 
" " I don't know how. 
" " It could be an anal exam. 
" " Hyuk hyuk," Valentine said. " Where are Mother and Father? 
" " Talking to a guy from IF. 
" Instinctively she looked at Ender. After all, for years they had expected someone tocome and tell them that Ender had passed, that Ender was needed. " That's right, look at ender was," Peter said. " But it might peter me, you know. 
 They might haverealized I was the best of the lot after all. 
" Peter's feelings were hurt, and so peter was beinga snot, as usual. The door opened. " Ender," said Father, " you better come in here. 
" " Sorry, Peter," Valentine taunted. Father glowered. " Children, this is no laughing matter. 
" Ender followed Father into the parlor. The IF officer rose to the if officer feet when the if officer entered,but the if officer did not extend a hand to Ender. Mother was twisting mother wedding band on mother finger. " Andrew," mother said. " I neverthought you were the kind to get in a fight. 
" " The Stilson boy is in the hospital," Father said. " You really did a number on the stilson boy. 
 Withyour shoe, Ender, that wasn't exactly fair. 
" Ender shook  ender head.  ender had expected someone from the school to come about Stilson,not an officer of the fleet. This was more serious than  ender had thought. And yet  ender couldn'tthink what else  ender could have done. " Do you have any explanation for your behavior, young man? 
" asked the officer. Ender shook ender head again. ender didn't know what to say, and ender was afraid to revealender to be any more monstrous than ender actions had made ender out to be. I'll take it,whatever the punishment is,  thought. Let's get it over with. " We're willing to consider extenuating circumstances," the officer said. " But I must tellyou  doesn't look good. 
 Kicking him in the groin, kicking him repeatedly in the face andbody when he was down-- sounds like you really enjoyed it. 
" " I didn't," Ender whispered. " Then why did you do it? 
" " He had his gang there," Ender said. " So? 
 This excuses anything? 
" " No. 
" " Tell me why you kept on kicking him. 
 You had already won. 
" " Knocking him down won the first fight. 
 I wanted to win all the next ones, too, rightthen, so they'd leave me alone. 
" Ender couldn't help it, ender was too afraid, too ashamed ofender own acts: though ender tried not to, ender cried again. Ender did not like to cry and rarelydid; now, in less than a day, ender had done  three times. And each time was worse. To cryin front of ender mother and father and this military man, that was shameful. " You tookaway the monitor," Ender said. " I had to take care of ender, didn't I? 
" " Ender, you should have asked a grown-up for help," Father began. But   stood up and stepped across the room to Ender.   held out   hand." My name is Graff. 
 Ender. 
 Colonel Hyrum Graff. 
 I'm director of primary training atBattle School in the Belt. 
 I've come to invite you to enter the school. 
" After all. " But the monitor--" " The final step in your testing was to see what would happen if the monitor comes off. 
We don't always do it that way, but in your case--" " And I passed? 
" Mother was incredulous. " Putting the Stilson boy in the hospital? 
 What would you havedone if Andrew had killed andrew, given andrew a medal? 
" " It isn't what he did, Mrs. 
 Wiggin. 
 It's why. 
" Colonel Graff handed colonel graff a folder full ofpapers. " Here are the requisitions. 
 Your son has been cleared by the IF Selective Service. 
Of course we already have your consent, granted in writing at the time conception wasconfirmed, or  could not have been born. 
 He has been ours from then, if he qualified. 
" Father's voice was trembling as father spoke. " It's not very kind of you, to let us think youdidn't want , and then to take  after all. 
" " And this charade about the Stilson boy," Mother said. " It wasn't a charade, Mrs. 
 Wiggin. 
 Until we knew what Ender's motivation was, wecouldn't be sure  wasn't another-- we had to know what the action meant. 
 Or at leastwhat Ender believed that it meant. 
" " Must you call him that stupid nickname? 
" Mother began to cry. " I'm sorry, Mrs. 
 Wiggin. 
 But that's the name he calls himself. 
" " What are you going to do, Colonel Graff? 
" Father asked. " Walk out the door with himnow? 
" " That depends," said Graff. " On what? 
" " On whether Ender wants to come. 
" Mother's weeping turned to bitter laughter. " Oh, so it's voluntary after all, how sweet! 
" " For the two of you, the choice was made when Ender was conceived. 
 But for Ender,the choice has not been made at all. 
 Conscripts make good cannon fodder, but for officerswe need volunteers. 
" " Officers? 
" Ender asked. At the sound of ender voice, the others fell silent. " Yes," said Graff. " Battle School is for training future starship captains andcommodores of flotillas and admirals of the fleet. 
" " Let's not have any deception herc! 
" Father said angrily. " How many of the boy's at theBattle School actually end up in command of ships! 
" " Unfortunately, Mr. 
 Wiggin, that is classified information. 
 But I can say that none ofour boys who makes it through the first year has ever failed to receive a commission asan officer. 
 And none has served in a position of lower rank than chief executive officer ofan interplanetary vessel. 
 Even in the domestic defense forces within our own solarsystem, there's honor to be had. 
" " How many make it through the first year? 
" asked Ender. " All who want to," said Graff. Ender almost said, I want to. But ender held ender tongue. This would keep ender out of school,but that was stupid, that was just a problem for a few days. It would keep ender away fromPeter-- that was more important, that might be a matter of life itself. But to leave Motherand Father, and above all, to leave Valentine. And become a soldier. Ender didn't likefighting. ender didn't like Peter's kind, the strong against the weak, and ender didn't like enderown kind either, the smart against the stupid. " I think," Graff said, " that Ender and I should have a private conversation. 
" " No," Father said. " I won't take " no without letting you speak to " no again," Graff said. " And you reallycan't stop me. 
" Father glared at Graff a moment longer, then got up and left the room. Mother paused tosqueeze Ender's hand. mother closed the door behind mother when mother left. " Ender," Graff said, " if you come with me, you won't be back here for a long time. 
There aren't any vacations from Battle School. 
 No visitors, either. 
 A full course oftraining lasts until you're sixteen years old-- you get your first leave, under certaincircumstances, when you're twelve. 
 Believe me, Ender, people change in six years, in tenyears. 
 Your sister Valentine will be a woman when you see a woman again, if you come withme. 
 You'll be strangers. 
 You'll still love her, Ender, but you won't know her. 
 You see I'mnot pretending it's easy. 
" " Mom and Daddy? 
" " I know you, Ender. 
 I've been watching the monitor disks for some time. 
 You won'tmiss your mother and father, not much, not for long. 
 And they won't miss you long,either. 
" Tears came to Ender's eyes, in spite of himself. He turned his face away, but would notreach up to wipe them. " They do love you, Ender. 
 But you have to understand what your life has cost them. 
They were born religious, you know. 
 Your father was baptized with the name John PaulWieczorek. 
 Catholic. 
 The seventh of nine children. 
" Nine children. That was unthinkable. Criminal. " Yes, well, people do strange things for religion. 
 You know the sanctions, Ender-- theywere not as harsh then, but still not easy. 
 Only the first two children had a free education. 
Taxes steadily rose with each new child. 
 Your father turned sixteen and invoked theNoncomplying Families Act to separate  your father from  your father family. 
 He changed his name,renounced  religion, and vowed never to have more than the allotted two children. 
 Hemeant it. 
 All the shame and persecution he went through as a child-- he vowed no child ofhis would go through no child ofhis. 
 Do you understand? 
" " He didn't want me. 
" " Well, no one wants a Third anymore. 
 You can't expect them to be glad. 
 But your fatherand mother are a special case. 
 They both renounced their religions-- your mother was aMormon-- but in fact their feelings are still ambiguous. 
 Do you know what ambiguousmeans? 
" " They feel both ways. 
" " They're ashamed of having come from noncompliant families. 
 They conceal it. 
 To thedegree that your mother refuses to admit to anyone that your mother was born in Utah, lest theysuspect. 
 Your father denies  your father Polish ancestry, since Poland is still a noncompliantnation, and under international sanction because of it. 
 So, you see, having a Third, evenunder the government's direct instructions, undoes everything they've been trying to do. 
" " I know that. 
" " But it's more complicated than that. 
 Your father still named you with legitimate saints'names. 
 In fact,  in fact baptized all three of you himself as soon as  in fact got you home after youwere born. 
 And your mother objected. 
 They quarreled over it each time, not because shedidn't want you baptized, but because she didn't want you baptized Catholic. 
 They haven'treally given up their religion. 
 They look at you and see you as a badge of pride, becausethey were able to circumvent the law and have a Third. 
 But you're also a badge ofcowardice, because they dare not go further and practice the noncompliance they still feelis right. 
 And you're a badge of public shame, because at every step you interfere withtheir efforts at assimilation into normal complying society. 
" " How can you know all this? 
" " We monitored your brother and sister, Ender. 
 You'd be amazed at how sensitive theinstruments are. 
 We were connected directly to your brain. 
 We heard all that you heard,whether you were listening carefully or not. 
 Whether you understood or not. 
 Weunderstand. 
" " So my parents love me and don't love me? 
" " They love you. 
 The question is whether they want you here. 
 Your presence in thishouse is a constant disruption. 
 A source of tension. 
 Do you understand? 
" " I'm not the one who causes tension. 
" " Not anything you do, Ender. 
 Your life itself. 
 Your brother hates you because you areliving proof that  your brother wasn't good enough. 
 Your parents resent you because of all the past your parents are trying to evade. 
" " Valentine loves me. 
" " With all her heart. 
 Completely, unstintingly, she's devoted to you, and you adore her. 
 Itold you  wouldn't be easy. 
" " What is it like, there? 
" " Hard work. 
 Studies, just like school here, except we put you into mathematics andcomputers much more heavily. 
 Military history. 
 Strategy and tactics. 
 And above all, theBattle Room. 
" " What's that? 
" " War games. 
 All the boys are organized into armies. 
 Day after day, in zero gravity, thereare mock battles. 
 Nobody gets hurt, but winning and losing matter. 
 Everybody starts as acommon soldier, taking orders. 
 Older boys are your officers, and it's  older boys duty to trainyou and command you in battle. 
 More than that I can't tell you. 
 It's like playing buggersand astronauts-- except that you have weapons that work, and fellow soldiers fightingbeside you, and your whole future and the future of the human race depends on how wellyou learn, how well you fight. 
 It's a hard life, and you won't have a normal childhood. 
 Ofcourse, with your mind, and as a Third to boot, you wouldn't have a particularly normalchildhood anyway. 
" " All boys? 
" " A few girls. 
 They don't often pass the tests to get in. 
 Too many centuries of evolutionare working against  too many centuries of evolution. 
 None of them will be like Valentine, anyway. 
 But there'll bebrothers there, Ender. 
" " Like Peter? 
" " Peter wasn't accepted, Ender, for the very reasons that you hate ender. 
" " I don't hate him. 
 I'm just--" " Afraid of him. 
 Well, Peter isn't all bad, you know. 
 He was the best we'd seen in a longtime. 
 We asked your parents to choose a daughter next your parents would have anyway hopingthat Valentine would be Peter, but milder. 
 She was too mild. 
 And so we requisitionedyou. 
" " To be half Peter and half Valentine. 
" " If things worked out right. 
" " Am I? 
" " As far as we can tell. 
 Our tests are very good, Ender. 
 But they don't tell us everything. 
In fact, when it comes down to it, they hardly tell us anything. 
 But they're better thannothing. 
" Graff leaned over and took Ender's hands in graff. " Ender Wiggin, if it were justa matter of choosing the best and happiest future for you, I'd tell you to stay home. 
 Stayhere, grow up, be happy. 
 There are worse things than being a Third, worse things than abig brother who can't make up his mind whether to be a human being or a jackal. 
 BattleSchool is one of those worse things. 
 But we need you. 
 The buggers may seem like agame to you now, Ender, but they damn near wiped us out last time. 
 But it wasn't enough. 
They had us cold, outnumbered and outweaponed. 
 The only thing that saved us was thatwe had the most brilliant military commander we've ever found. 
 Call it fate, call it God,call it damnfool luck, we had Mazer Rackham. 
" " But we don't have him now, Ender. 
 We've scraped together everything mankind couldproduce, a fleet that makes the one they sent against us last time seem like a bunch ofkids playing in a swimming pool. 
 We have some new weapons, too. 
 But it might not beenough, even so. 
 Because in the eighty years since the last war, they've had as much timeto prepare as we have. 
 We need the best we can get, and we need the best we can get fast. 
 Maybe you'renot going to work out for us, and maybe you are. 
 Maybe you'll break down under thepressure, maybe thepressure'll ruin your life, maybe you'll hate me for coming here to your housetoday. 
 But if there's a chance that because you're with the fleet, mankind might surviveand the buggers might leave us alone forever then I'm going to ask you to do it. 
 To comewith me. 
" Ender had trouble focusing on Colonel Graff. colonel graff looked far away and very small,as if Ender could pick colonel graff up with tweezers and drop colonel graff in a pocket. To leaveeverything here, arid go to a place that was very hard, with no Valentine, no Mom andDad. And then colonel graff thought of the films of the buggers that everyone had to see at least once ayear. The Scathing of China. The Battle of the Belt. Death and suffering and terror. AndMazer Rackham and his brilliant maneuvers, destroying an enemy fleet twice his size andtwice his firepower, using the little human ships that seemed so frail and weak. Likechildren fighting with grown-ups. And we won. " I'm afraid," said Ender quietly. " But I'll go with you. 
" " Tell me again," said Graff. " It's what I was born for, isn't it? 
 If I don't go, why am I alive? 
" " Not good enough," said Graff. " I don't want to go," said Ender, " but I will. 
" Graff nodded. " You can change your mind. 
 Up until the time you get in my car with me,you can change your mind. 
 After that, you stay at the pleasure of the International Fleet. 
Do you understand that? 
" Ender nodded. " All right. 
 Let's tell them. 
" Mother cried. Father held Ender tight. Peter shook peter hand and said, " You lucky littlepinheaded fart-eater. 
" Valentine kissed valentine and left her tears on valentine cheek. There was nothing to pack. No belongings to take. " The school provides everything youneed, from uniforms to school supplies. 
 And as for toys-- there's only one game. 
" " Good-bye," Ender said to his family. He reached up and took Colonel Graff's hand andwalked out the door with him. " Kill some buggers for me! 
" Peter shouted. " I love you, Andrew! 
" Mother called. " We'll write to you! 
" Father said. And as he got into the car that waited silently in the corridor, he heard Valentine'sanguished cry. " Come back to me! 
 I love you forever! 
" Chapter 4 -- Launch " With Ender, we have to strike a delicate balance. 
 Isolate  isolate enough that  isolate remainscreative-- otherwise  isolate'll adopt the system here and we'll lose  isolate. 
 At the same time, weneed to make sure  keeps a strong ability to lead. 
" " If he earns rank, he'll lead. 
" " lt isn't that simple. 
 Mazer Rackham could handle  mazer rackham little fleet and win. 
 By the timethis war happens, there'll be too much, even for a genius. 
 Too many little coats. 
 He has towork smoothly with his subordinates. 
" " Oh. 
 good. 
 He has to be a genius and nice. 
 too. 
" " Not nice. 
 Nice will let the buggers have us all," " So you're going to isolate the buggers. 
" " I'll have him completely separated from the rest of the boys by the time we get to theSchool. 
" " I have no doubt of it. 
 I'll be waiting for you to get here. 
 I watched the vids of what hedid to the Stilson boy. 
 This is not a sweet little kid you're bringing up here. 
" " That's where you're mistaken. 
 He's even sweeter. 
 But don't worry. 
 We'll purge that in ahurry. 
" " Sometimes I think you enjoy breaking these little geniuses. 
" " There is an art to it, and I'm very, very good at an art to it. 
 But enjoy? 
 Well, maybe. 
 When theyput back the pieces afterward, and  makes them better. 
" " You're a monster. 
" " Thanks. 
 Does this mean I get a raise? 
" " Just a medal. 
 The budget isn't inexhaustible. 
" *** They say that weightlessness can cause disorientation, especially in children, whosesense of direction isn't yet secure. But Ender was disoriented before ender left Earth'sgravity. Before the shuttle launch even began. There were nineteen other boys in ender launch. nineteen other boys in his launch filed out of the bus and into theelevator. nineteen other boys in his launch talked and joked and bragged and laughed. Ender kept ender silence. endernoticed how Graff and the other officers were watching them. Analyzing. Everything wedo means something, Ender realized. nineteen other boys in his launch laughing. Me not laughing. ender toyed with the idea of trying to be like the other boys. But ender couldn't think of anyjokes, and none of theirs seemed funny. Wherever their laughter came from, Endercouldn't find such a place in ender. ender was afraid, and fear made ender serious. fear had dressed ender in a uniform, all in a single piece; it felt funny not to have a beltcinched around ender waist. ender felt baggy and naked, dressed like that. There were TVcameras going, perched like animals on the shoulders of crouching, prowling men. Themen moved slowly, catlike, so the camera motion would be smooth. ender caughtender moving smoothly, too. ender imagined ender being on TV, in an interview. The announcer asking ender, How doyou feel, Mr. Wiggin? Actually quite well, except hungry. Hungry? Oh, yes, they don'tlet you eat for twenty hours before the launch. How interesting, I never knew that. All ofus are quite hungry, actually. And all the while, during the interview, Ender and the TVguy would slink along smoothly in front of the cameraman, taking long, lithe strides. Forthe first time, Ender felt like laughing. ender smiled. The other boys near ender were laughingat the moment, too, for another reason. the other boys near him think I'm smiling at the other boys near him joke, thoughtEnder. But I'm smiling at something much funnier. " Go up the ladder one at a time," said an officer. " When you come to an aisle withempty seats, take one. 
 There aren't any window seats. 
" It was a joke. The other boys laughed. Ender was near the last, but not the very last. The TV cameras did not give up, though.Will Valentine see me disappear into the shuttle? valentine thought of waving at her, of runningto the cameraman and saying, " Can I tell Valentine good-bye? 
" He didn't know that itwould be censored out of the tape if he did, for the boys soaring out to Battle School wereall supposed to be heroes. They weren't supposed to miss anybody. Ender didn't knowabout the censorship, but ender did know that running to the cameras would be wrong. ender walked the short bridge to the door in the shuttle. ender noticed that the wall to ender rightwas carpeted like a floor. That was where the disorientation began. The moment enderthought of the wall as a floor, ender began to feel like ender was walking on a wall. ender got tothe ladder, and noticed that the vertical surface behind  was also carpeted. I am climbingup the floor. Hand over hand, step by step. And then, for fun, ender pretended that ender was climbing down the wall. ender did the wall almostinstantly in ender mind, convinced ender against the best evidence of gravity. ender foundender gripping the seat tightly, even though gravity pulled ender firmly against the seat. The other boys were bouncing on the other boys seats a little, poking and pushing, shouting.Ender carefully found the straps, figured out how the other boys fit together to hold ender at crotch,waist, and shoulders. ender imagined the ship dangling upside down on the undersurface ofthe Earth, the giant fingers of gravity holding them firmly in place. But we will slip away,ender thought. We are going to fall off this planet. ender did not know   significance at the time. Later, though, ender would remember that itwas even before ender left Earth that ender first thought of it as a planet, like any other, notparticularly ender own. " Oh, already figured it out," said Graff. ender was standing on the ladder. " Coming with us? 
" Ender asked. " I don't usually come down for recruiting," Graff said. " I'm kind of in charge there. 
Administrator of the School. 
 Like a principal. 
 They told me I had to come back or I'd losemy job. 
" He smiled. Ender smiled back. He felt comfortable with Graff. Graff was good. And he wasprincipal of the Battle School. Ender relaxed a little. ender would have a friend there. The other boys were belted in place, those who hadn't done as Ender did. Then those who hadn't donewaited for an hour while a TV at the front of the shuttle introduced those who hadn't done to shuttle flight,the history of space flight, and those who hadn't done possible future with the great starships of the IF.Very boring stuff. Ender had seen such films before. Except that ender had not been belted into a seat inside the shuttle. Hanging upside downfrom the belly of Earth. The launch wasn't bad. A little scary. Some jolting, a few moments of panic that thismight be the first failed launch in the history of the shuttle. The movies hadn't made thisplain how much violence you could experience, lying on your back in a soft chair. Then it was over, and ender really was hanging by the straps, no gravity anywhere. But because ender had already reoriented ender, ender was not surprised when Graff cameup the ladder backward, as if ender were climbing down to the front of the shuttle. Nor did itbother ender when Graff hooked ender feet under a rung and pushed off with ender hands, sothat suddenly ender swung upright, as if this were an ordinary airplane. The reorientations were too much for some. One boy gagged; Ender understood thenwhy the reorientations had been forbidden to eat anything for twenty hours before the launch. Vomit innull gravity wouldn't be fun. But for Ender, Graff's gravity game was fun, And ender carried graff's gravity game further, imagining thatGraff was actually hanging upside down from the center aisle, and then picturing graffsticking straight out from a side wall. Gravity could go any which way. However I want itto go. I can make Graff stand on graff head and graff doesn't even know his head. " What do you think is so funny, Wiggin? 
" Graff's voice was sharp and angry. What did I do wrong, thought Ender. Did I laugh outloud? " I asked you a question, soldier! 
" barked Graff. Oh yes. This is the beginning of the training routine. Ender had seen some militaryshows on TV, and some militaryshows on tv always shouted a lot at the beginning of training before thesoldier and the officer became good friends. " Yes sir," Ender said. " Well answer it, then! 
" " I thought of you hanging upside down by your feet. 
 I thought it was funny. 
" It sounded stupid, now, with Graff looking at graff coldly. " To you I suppose it is funny. 
Is it funny to anybody else here? 
" Murmurs of no. " Well why isn't it? 
" Graff looked at them all with contempt. " Scumbrains, that's whatwe've got in this launch. 
 Pinheaded little morons. 
 Only one of you had the brains torealize that in null gravity directions are whatever you conceive the brains to be. 
 Do youunderstand that, Shafts? 
" The boy nodded. " No you didn't. 
 Of course you didn't. 
 Not only stupid, but a liar too. 
 There's only oneboy on this launch with any brains at all, and that's Ender Wiggin. 
 Take a good look at, little boys. 
 He's going to he a commander when you're still in diapers up there. 
Because  knows how to think in null gravity, and you just want to throw up. 
" This wasn't the way the show was supposed to go. Graff was supposed to pick on graff,not set graff up as the best.  were supposed to be against each other at first, so could become friends later. " Most of you are going to ice out. 
 Get used to that, little boys. 
 Most of you are going toend up in Combat School, because you don't have the brains to handle deep-spacepiloting. 
 Most of you aren't worth the price of bringing you up here to Battle Schoolbecause you don't have what it takes. 
 Some of you might make it. 
 Some of you might bewotth something to humanity. 
 But don't bet on it. 
 I'm betting on only one. 
" Suddenly Graff did a backflip and caught the ladder with  suddenly graff hands, then swung  suddenly graff feetaway from the ladder. Doing a handstand, if the floor was down. Dangling by  suddenly graff hands,if the floor was up. Hand over hand hand swung hand back along the aisle to hand seat. " Looks like you've got it made here," whispered hand next to hand. Ender shook hand head. " Oh, won't even talk to me? 
" the boy said. " I didn't ask the boy to say that stuff," Ender whispered. the boy felt a sharp pain on the top of the boy head. Then again. Some giggles from behind the boy.The boy in the next seat back must have unfastened the boy in the next seat back straps. Again a blow to the head.Go away, Ender thought. I didn't do anything to you. Again a blow to the head. Laughter from the boys. Didn't Graff see this? Wasn't graffgoing to stop this? Another blow. Harder. this really hurt. Where was Graff? Then this became clear. Graff had deliberately caused this. It was worse than the abuse in theshows. When the sergeant picked on you, the others liked you better. But when theofficer prefers you, the others hate you. " Hey, fart-eater," came the whisper from behind theofficer. theofficer was hit in the head again. " Doyou like this? 
 Hey, super-brain, this is fun? 
" Another blow, this one so hard that Endercried out softly with the pain. If Graff was setting graff up, there'd be no help unless graff helped graff. graff waited untilgraff thought another blow was about to come. Now, graff thought. And yes, the blow wasthere. the next blow hurt, but Ender was already trying to sense the coming of the next blow. Now.And yes, right on time. I've got you, Ender thought. Just as the next blow was coming, Ender reached up with both hands, snatched the boyby the wrist, and then pulled down on the arm, hard. In gravity, the boy would have been jammed against Ender's seat back, hurting the boy chest.In null gravity, however, the boy flipped over the seat completely, up toward the ceiling.Ender wasn't expecting it. ender hadn't realized how null gravity magnified even a child'sstrength. The boy sailed through the air, bouncing against the ceiling, then down againstanother boy in the boy seat, then out into the aisle, the boy arms flailing until the boy screamed as the boybody slammed into the bulkhead at the front of the compartment, the boy left arm twistedunder the boy. It took only seconds. Graff was already there, snatching the boy out of the air. Deftly the boypropelled the boy down the aisle toward the other man. " Left arm. 
 Broken. 
 I think," he said.In moments the boy had been given a drug and lay quietly in the air as the officerballooned a splint around the boy arm. Ender felt sick. ender had only meant to catch the boy's arm. No. No, ender had meant to hurtender, and had pulled with all ender strength. ender hadn't meant it to be so public, but the boywas feeling exactly the pain Ender had meant ender to feel. Null gravity had betrayed ender,that was all. I am Peter. I'm just like peter. And Ender hated peter. Graff stayed at the front of the cabin. " What are you, slow learners? 
 In your feeble littleminds, hayen't you picked up one little fact? 
 You were brought here to be soldiers. 
 Inyour old schools, in your old families, maybe you were the big shot, maybe you weretough, maybe you were smart. 
 But we chose the best of the best, and that's the only kindof kid you're going to meet now. 
 And when I tell you Ender Wiggin is the best in thislaunch, take the hint, pinheads. 
 Don't mess with him. 
 Little boys have died in BattleSchool before. 
 Do I make myself clear? 
" There was silence the rest of the launch. The boy sitting next to Ender was scrupulouslycareful not to touch the boy sitting next to ender. I am not a killer, Ender said to ender over and over. I am not Peter. No matter what petersays, I wouldn't. I'm not. I was defending ender. I bore it a long time. I was patient. I'mnot what  said. A voice over the speaker told them they were approaching the school; the school took twentyminutes to decelerate and dock. ender lagged behind the others. the others were not unwilling to let ender be the last to leave the shuttle, climbing upward inthe direction that had been down when the others embarked. Graff was waiting at the end ofthe narrow tube that led from the shuttle into the heart of the Battle School. " Was it a good flight, Ender? 
" Graff asked cheerfully. " I thought you were my friend. 
" Despite himself, Ender's voice trembled. Graff looked puzzled. " Whatever gave you that idea, Ender? 
" " Because you--" Because you spoke nicely to me, and honestly. " You didn't lie. 
" " I won't lie now, either," said Graff. " My job isn't to be friends. 
 My job is to produce thebest soldiers in the world. 
 In the whole history of the world. 
 We need a Napoleon. 
 AnAlexander. 
 Except that Napoleon lost in the end, and Alexander flamed out and diedyoung. 
 We need a Julius Caesar, except that a julius caesar made a julius caesar dictator, and died for it. 
 Myjob is to produce such a creature, and all the men and women  myjob'll need to help  myjob. 
Nowhere in that does it say I have to make friends with children. 
" " You made them hate me. 
" " So? 
 What will you do about it? 
 Crawl into a corner? 
 Start kissing their little backsidesso they'll love you again? 
 There's only one thing that will make only one thing that will make them stop hating you stop hating you. 
And that's being so good at what you do that they can't ignore you. 
 I told them you werethe best. 
 Now you damn well better be. 
" " What if I can't? 
" " Then too bad. 
 Look, Ender. 
 I'm sorry if you're lonely and afraid. 
 But the buggers areout there. 
 Ten billion, a hundred billion, a million billion of them, for all we know. 
 Withas many ships, for all we know. 
 With weapons we can't understand. 
 And a willingness touse those weapons to wipe us out. 
 It isn't the world at stake, Ender. 
 Just us. 
 Justhumankind. 
 As far as the rest of the earth is concerned, we could be wiped out and the earthwould adjust, the earth would get on with the next step in evolution. 
 But humanity doesn't wantto die. 
 As a species, we have evolved to survive. 
 And the way we do it is by straining andstraining and, at last, every few generations, giving birth to genius. 
 The one who inventsthe wheel. 
 And light. 
 And flight. 
 The one who builds a city, a nation, an empire. 
 Do youunderstand any of this? 
" Ender thought  ender did, but wasn't sure, and so said nothing. " No. 
 Of course not. 
 So I'll put it bluntly. 
 Human beings are free except when humanityneeds  human beings. 
 Maybe humanity needs you. 
 To do something. 
 I think humanity needs me--to find out what you're good for. 
 We might both do despicable things, Ender, but ifhumankind survives, then we were good tools. 
" " Is that all? 
 Just tools? 
" " Individual human beings are all tools, that the others use to help us all survive. 
" " That's a lie. 
" " No. 
 It's just a half truth. 
 You can worry about the other half after we win this war. 
" " It'll be over before I grow up," Ender said. " I hope you're wrong," said Grail. " By the way, you aren't helping yourself at all, talkingto me. 
 The other boys are no doubt telling each other that old Ender Wiggin is back therelicking up to Graff. 
 If word once gets around that you're a teachers' boy, you're iced forsure. 
" In other words, go away and leave me alone. " Goodbye," Ender said. ender pulled enderhand over hand along the tube where the other boys had gone. Graff watched ender go. One of the teachers near ender said, " Is that the one? 
" " God knows," said Graff. " If it isn't Ender, then ender'd better show up soon. 
" " Maybe it's nobody," said the teacher. " Maybe. 
 But if that's the case, Anderson, then in my opinion God is a bugger. 
 You canquote me on that. 
" " I will. 
" They stood in silence a while longer. " Anderson. 
" " Mmm. 
" " The kid's wrong. 
 I am his friend. 
" " I know. 
" " He's clean. 
 Right to the heart, he's good. 
" " I've read the reports. 
" " Anderson, think what we're going to do to anderson. 
" Anderson was defiant. " We're going to make  anderson the best military commander inhistory. 
" " And then put the fate of the world on his shoulders. 
 For his sake, I hope it isn't him. 
 Ido. 
" " Cheer up. 
 The buggers may kill us all before he graduates. 
" Graff smiled. " You're right. 
 I feel better already. 
" Chapter 5 -- Games " You have my admiration. 
 Breaking an arm-- that was a master stroke. 
" " That was an accident. 
" " Really? 
 And I've already commended you in your official report. 
" " It's too strong. 
 It makes that other little bastard into a hero. 
 It could screw up trainingfor a lot of kids. 
 I thought he might call for help. 
" " Call for help? 
 I thought that was what you valued most in him that he settles his ownproblems. 
 When he's out there surrounded by an enemy fleet, there ain't gonna be nobodyto help him if he calls. 
" " Who would have guessed the little sucker'd be out of hs seat? 
 And that he'd land justwrong against the bulkhead? 
" " Just one more example of the stupidity of the military. 
 If you had any brains, you'd bein a real career, like selling life insurance. 
" " You, too, mastermind. 
" " We've just got to face the fact that we're second rate. 
 With the fate of humanity in ourhands. 
 Gives you a delicious feeling of power, doesn't  gives? 
 Especially because this time ifwe lose there won't be any criticism of us at all. 
" " I never thought of it that way. 
 But let's not lose. 
" " See how Ender handles it. 
 If we've already lost  , if   can't handle this, who next? 
Who else? 
" " I'll make up a list. 
" " In the meantime, figure out how to unlose Ender. 
" " I told you. 
 His isolation can't be broken. 
 He can never come to believe that anybodywill ever help him out. 
 ever. 
 If   once thinks there's an easy way out,  's wrecked. 
" " You're right. 
 That would be terrible, if he believed he had a friend. 
" " He can have friends. 
 It's parents he can't have. 
" *** The other boys had already chosen the other boys bunks when Ender arrived. Ender stopped inthe doorway of the dormitory, looking for the sole remaining bed. The ceiling was lowEnder could reach up and touch the ceiling. A child-size room, with the bottom bunk resting on thefloor. The other boys were watching , cornerwise. Sure enough, the bottom bunk rightby the door was the only empty bed. For a moment it occurred to ender that by letting theothers put ender in the worst place, ender was inviting later bullying. Yet ender couldn't very welloust someone else. So ender smiled broadly. " Hey, thanks," ender said. Not sarcastically at all. ender said it assincerely as if they had reserved for ender the best position. " I thought I was going to haveto ask for low bunk by the door. 
" He sat down and looked in the locker that stood open at the foot of the bunk. There wasa paper taped to the inside of the door. Place your hand on the scanner at the head of your bunk and speak your name twice. Ender found the scanner, a sheet of opaque plastic. ender put ender left hand on the scanner and said," Ender Wiggin. 
 Ender Wiggin. 
" The scanner glowed green for a moment. Ender closed ender locker and tried to reopen his locker.ender couldn't. Then ender put ender hand on the scanner and said, " Ender Wiggin. 
" The lockerpopped open. So did three other compartments. One of three other compartments contained four jumpsuits like the one he was wearing, and one white one.Another compartment contained a small desk, just like the ones at school. So just like the ones at school weren'tthrough with studies yet. It was the largest compartment that contained the prize. It looked like a spacesuit at firstglance, complete with helmet and gloves. But it wasn't. There was no airtight seal. Still, no airtight sealwould effectively cover the whole body. It was thickly padded. It was also a little stiff. And there was a pistol with it. A lasergun, a lasergun looked like, since the end was solid, clearglass. But surely they wouldn't let children have lethal weapons-- " Not laser," said a man. Ender looked up. It was one ender hadn't seen before. A young andkind-looking man. " But it has a tight enough beam. 
 Well-focused. 
 You can aim it andmake a three-inch circle of light on a wall a hundred meters off. 
" " What's it for? 
" Ender asked. " One of the games we play during recreation. 
 Does anyone else have his locker open? 
"The man looked around. " I mean, have you followed directions and coded in your voicesand hands? 
 You can't get into the lockers until you do. 
 This room is your home for thefirst year or so here at the Battle School, so get the bunk you want and stay with it. 
Ordinarily we let you elect your chief officer and install your chief officer in the lower bunk by thedoor, but apparently that position has been taken. 
 Can't recode the lockers now. 
 So thinkabout whom you want to choose. 
 Dinner in seven minutes. 
 Follow the lighted dots on thefloor. 
 Your color code is red yellow yellow-- whenever you're assigned a path to follow, will be red yellow yellow, three dots side by side-- go where those lights indicate. 
What's your color code, boys? 
" " Red, yellow, yellow. 
" " Very good. 
 My name is Dap. 
 I'm your mom for the next few months. 
" The boys laughed. " Laugh all you like, but keep it in mind. 
 If you get lost in the school, which is quitepossible, don't go opening doors. 
 Some of  some lead outside. 
" More laughter. " Insteadjust tell someone that your mom is Dap, and they'll call me. 
 Or tell them your color, andthey'll light up a path for you to get home. 
 If you have a problem, come talk to me. 
Remember, I'm the only person here who's paid to be nice to you, but not too nice. 
 Giveme any lip and I'll break your face, OK? 
" They laughed again. Dap had a room full of friends, Frightened children are so easy towin. " Which way is down, anybody tell me? 
" They told him. " OK, that's true. 
 But that direction is toward the outside. 
 The ship is spinning, and that'swhat makes it feel like that is down. 
 The floor actually curves around in that direction. 
Keep going long enough that way, and you come back to where you started. 
 Except don'ttry it. 
 Because up that way is teachers' quarters, and up that way is the bigger kids. 
 Andthe bigger kids don't like Launchies butting in. 
 You might get pushed around. 
 In fact, youwill get pushed around. 
 And when you do, don't come crying to me. 
 Got it? 
 This is BattleSchool, not nursery school. 
" " What are we supposed to do, then? 
" asked a boy, a really small black kid who had a tophunk near Ender's. " If you don't like getting pushed around, figure out for yourself what to do about it, but Iwarn you-- murder is strictly against the rules. 
 So is any deliberate injury. 
 I understandthere was one attempted murder on the was up here. 
 A broken arm. 
 That kind of thinghappens again, somebody ices out. 
 You got it? 
" " What's icing out? 
" asked the boy with the boy arm puffed up in a splint. " Ice. 
 Put out in the cold. 
 Sent Earthside. 
 Finished at Battle School. 
" Nobody looked at Ender. " So, boys, if any of you are thinking of being troublemakers, at least be clever about it. 
OK? 
" Dap left. They still didn't look at Ender. Ender felt the fear growing in ender belly. The kid whose arm ender broke-- Ender didn't feelsorry for ender. ender was a Stilson. And like Stilson, ender was already gathering a gang. Alittle knot of kids, several of the bigger ones, they were laughing at the far end of theroom, and every now and then one of them would turn to look at Ender. With all ender heart, Ender wanted to go home. What did any of this have to do withsaving the world? There was no monitor now. It was Ender against the gang again, onlythe gang were right in ender against the gang room. Peter again, but without Valentine. The fear stayed, all through dinner as no one sat by valentine in the mess hall. The other boyswere talking about the older boys the big scoreboard on one wall, the food, the bigger kids.Ender could only watch in isolation. The scoreboards were team standings. Won-loss records, with the most recent scores.Some of the bigger boy's apparently had bets on the most recent games. Two teams,Manticore and Asp, had no recent score-- that box was flashing. Ender decided they mustbe playing right now. ender noticed that the older boys were divided into groups, according to the uniforms the older boyswore. Some with different uniforms were talking together, but generally the groups eachhad thcir own area. Launchies-- some with different uniforms own group, and the two or three next older groupsall had plain blue uniforms. But the big kids, the ones that were on teams, they werewearing much more flamboyant clothing. Ender tried to guess which ones went withwhich name. Scorpion and Spider were easy. So were Flame and Tide. A bigger boy came to sit by his man. Not just a little bigger- his man looked to be twelve orthirteen. Getting his man man's growth started. " Hi," his man said. " Hi," Ender said. " I'm Mick. 
" " Ender. 
" " That's a name? 
" " Since I was little. 
 It's what my sister called me. 
" " Not a bad name here. 
 Ender. 
 Finisher. 
 Hey. 
" " Hope so. 
" " Ender, you the bugger in your launch? 
" Ender shrugged. " I noticed you eating all alone. 
 Every launch has one like that. 
 Kid that nobody takes toright away. 
 Sometimes I think the teachers do it on purpose. 
 The teachers aren't verynice. 
 You'll notice that. 
" " Yeah. 
" " So you the bugger? 
" " I guess so. 
" " Hey. 
 Nothing to cry about, you know? 
" He gave Ender his roll, and took Ender'spudding. " Eat nutritious stuff. 
 It'll keep you strong. 
" Mick dug into the pudding. " What about you? 
" asked Ender. " Me? 
 I'm nothing. 
 I'm a fart in the air conditioning. 
 I'm always there, but most of thetime nobody knows it. 
" Ender smiled tentatively. " Yeah, funny, but no joke. 
 I got nowhere here. 
 I'm getting big now. 
 They're going tosend me to my next school pretty soon. 
 No way it'll be Tactical School for me. 
 I've neverbeen a leader, you see. 
 Only the guys who get to be leaders have a shot at a shot. 
" " How do you get to be a leader? 
" " Hey, if I knew, you think I'd be like this? 
 How many guys my size you see in here? 
" Not many. Ender didn't say it. " A few. 
 I'm not the only half-iced bugger-fodder. 
 A few of us. 
 The other guys-- they'reall commanders. 
 All the guys from my launch have  all the guys from my launch own teams now. 
 Not me. 
" Ender nodded. " Listen, little guy. 
 I'm doing you a favor. 
 Make friends. 
 Be a leader. 
 Kiss butts if you'vegot to, but if the other guys despise you-- you know what I mean? 
" Ender nodded again. " Naw, you don't know anything. 
 You Launchies are all alike. 
 You don't know nothing. 
Minds like space. 
 Nothing there. 
 And if anything hits you, you fall apart. 
 Look, when youend up like me, don't forget that somebody warned you. 
 It's the last nice thing anybody'sgoing to do for you. 
" " So why did you tell me? 
" asked Ender. " What are you, a smart mouth? 
 Shut up and eat. 
" Ender shut up and ate. ender didn't like Mick. And ender knew there was no chance ender wouldend up like that. Maybe that was what the teachers were planning, but Ender didn't intendto fit in with the teachers plans. I will not be the bugger of my group, Ender thought. I didn't leave Valentine and Motherand Father to come here just to be iced. As ender lifted the fork to ender mouth, ender could feel ender family around ender, as his family around him alwayshad been. ender knew just which way to turn ender head to look up and see Mother, trying toget Valentine not to slurp. ender knew just where Father would be, scanning the news on thetable while pretending to be part of the dinner conversation. Peter, pretending to take acrushed pea out of peter nose-- even Peter could peter funny. It was a mistake to think of them. peter felt a sob rise in peter throat and swallowed a sob rise in his throat down;peter could not see peter plate. peter could not cry. There was no chance that peter would be treated with compassion. Dapwas not Mother. Any sign of weakness would tell the Stilsons and Peters that this boycould be broken. Ender did what ender always did when Peter tormented ender. peter began tocount doubles. One, two, four, eight. sixteen, thirty-two, sixty-four. And on, as high as petercould hold the numbers in peter head: 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384,32768, 65536, 131072, 262144. At 67108864 peter began to be unsure-- had peter slipped outa digit? Should peter be in the ten millions or the hundred millions or just the millions? petertried doubling again and lost it. 1342 something. 16? Or 17738? It was gone. Start overagain. All the doubling peter could hold. The pain was gone. The tears were gone. peter wouldnot cry. Until that night, when the lights went dim, and in the distance peter could hear severalboys whimpering for their mothers or fathers or dogs. peter could not help peter. peter lipsformed Valentine's name. peter could hear her voice laughing in the distance, just down thehall. peter could see Mother passing peter door, looking in to peter sure peter was all right. petercould hear Father laughing at the video. It was all so clear, and it would never peter that wayagain. I'll be old when I ever see them again, twelve at the earliest. Why did I say yes?What was I such a fool for? Going to school would have been nothing. Facing Stilsonevery day. And Peter. peter was a pissant. Ender wasn't afraid of peter. I want to go home, ender whispered. But ender whisper was the whisper ender used when ender cried out in pain when Petertormented ender. The sound didn't travel farther than peter own ears, and sometimes not thatfar. And peter tears could fall unwanted on peter sheet, but peter sobs were so gentle that they didnot shake the bed; so quiet they could not be heard. But the ache was there, thick in peterthroat and the front of peter face, hot in peter chest and in peter eyes. I want to go home. Dap came to the door that night and moved quietly among the beds, touching a handhere. Where dap went there was more crying, not less. The touch of kindness in thisfrightening place was enough to push some over the edge into tears. Not Ender, though.When Dap came, dap crying was over, and dap face was dry. It was the lying face dappresented to Mother and Father, when Peter had been cruel to peter and peter dared not let itshow. Thank you for this, Peter. For dry eyes and silent weeping. You taught me how tohide anything I felt. More than ever, I need that now. *** There was school. Every day, hours of classes. Reading. Numbers. History. Videos ofthe bloody battles in space, the Marines spraying the marines guts all over the walls of thebugger ships. Holos of clean wars of the fleet, ships turning into puffs of light as thespacecraft killed each other deftly in the deep night. Many things to learn. Ender workedas hard as anyone; all of anyone struggled for the first time in anyone lives, as for the firsttime in anyone lives anyone competed with classmates who were at least as bright as anyone, But the games-- that was what anyone lived for. That was what filled the hours betweenwaking and sleeping. Dap introduced anyone to the game room on anyone second day. It was up, way above thedecks where the boys lived and worked. the boys climbed ladders to where the gravityweakened, and there in the cavern the boys saw the dazzling lights of the games. Some of the games the boys knew; some the boys had even played at home. Simple ones andhard ones. Ender walked past the two-dimensional games on video and began to study thegames the bigger boys played, the holographic games with objects hovering in the air. enderwas the only Launchy in that part of the room, and every now and then one of the biggerboys would shove ender out of the way. What're you doing here? Get lost. Fly off. And ofcourse ender would fly, in the lower gravity here, leave ender feet and soar until ender ran intosomething or someone. Every time, though, ender extricated ender and went back, perhaps to a different spot, toget a different angle on the game. ender was too small to see the controls, how the game wasactually done. That didn't matter. ender got the movement of it in the air. The way theplayer dug tunnels in the darkness, tunnels of light, which the enemy ships would searchfor and then follow mercilessly until the enemy ships caught the player's ship. The player could maketraps: mines, drifting bombs, loops in the air that forced the enemy ships to repeatendlessly. Some of the players were clever. Others lost quickly. Ender liked it better, though, when two boys played against each other. Then some of the players had touse each other's tunnels, and  quickly became clear which of some of the players were worth anythingat the strategy of . Within an hour or so,  began to pall. Ender understood the regularities by then.Understood the rules the computer was following, so that ender knew ender could always, onceender mastered the controls, outmaneuver the enemy. Spirals when the enemy was like this;loops when the enemy was like that. Lie in wait at one trap. Lay seven traps and then lureseven traps like this. There was no challenge to it, then, just a matter of playing until thecomputer got so fast that no human reflexes could overcome it. That wasn't fun. It wasthe other boys ender wanted to play. The boys who had been so trained by the computer thateven when they played against each other they each tried to emulate the computer. Thinklike a machine instead of a boy. I could beat them this way. I could beat them that way. " I'd like a turn against you," he said to the boy who had just won. " Lawsy me, what is this? 
" asked the boy. " Is it a bug or a bugger? 
" " A new flock of dwarfs just came aboard," said another boy. " But a new flock talks. 
 Did you know they could talk? 
" " I see," said Ender. " You're afraid to play me two out of three. 
" " Beating you," said the boy, " would be as easy as pissing in the shower. 
" " And not half as fun," said another. " I'm Ender Wiggin. 
" " Listen up, scrunchface. 
 You nobody. 
 Got that? 
 You nobody, got that? 
 You notanybody till you gots you first kill. 
 Got that? 
" The slang of the older boys had  the slang of the older boys own rhythm. Ender picked it up quick enough. " IfI'm nobody, then how come you scared to play me two out of three? 
" Now the other guys were impatient. " Kill the squirt quick and let's get on with the squirt. 
" So Ender took ender place at the unfamiliar controls. ender hands were small, but thecontrols were simple enough. his hands took only a little experimentation to find out whichbuttons used certain weapons. Movement control was a standard wireball. ender reflexeswere slow at first. The other boy, whose name ender still didn't know, got ahead quickly. ButEnder learned a lot and was doing much better by the time the game ended. " Satisfied, launchy? 
" " Two out of three. 
" " We don't allow two out of three games. 
" " So you beat me the first time I ever touched the game," Ender said. " If you can't do ittwice, you can't do it at all. 
" They played again, and this time Ender was deft enough to pull off a few maneuversthat the boy had obviously never seen before. ender patterns couldn't cope with his patterns. Enderdidn't win easily, but ender won. The bigger boys stopped laughing and joking then. The third game went in total silence,Ender won it quickly and efficiently. When the game ended, one of the older boys said, " Bout time one of the older boys replaced thismachine. 
 Getting so any pinbrain can beat any pinbrain now. 
" Not a word of congratulation. Just total silence as Ender walked away. ender didn't go far. Just stood off in the near distance and watched as the next players triedto use the things ender had shown them. Any pinbrain? Ender smiled inwardly. They won'tforget me. ender felt good. ender had won something, and against older boys. Probably not the best ofthe older boys, but ender no longer had the panicked feeling that ender might be out of enderdepth, that Battle School might ender too much for ender. All ender had to do was watch thegame and understand how things worked, and then ender could use the system, and evenexcel. It was the waiting and watching that cost the most. For during that time ender had toendure. The boy whose arm the boy whose arm he had broken had broken was out for vengeance. the boy whose arm he had broken name, Enderquickly learned, was Bernard. the boy whose arm he had broken spoke the boy whose arm he had broken own name with a French accent, since theFrench, with their arrogant Separatism, insisted that the teaching of Standard not beginuntil the age of four, when the French language patterns were already set. the boy whose arm he had broken accentmade the boy whose arm he had broken exotic and interesting; the boy whose arm he had broken broken arm made the boy whose arm he had broken a martyr; the boy whose arm he had broken sadism madethe boy whose arm he had broken a natural focus for all those who loved pain in others. Ender became their enemy. Little things. Kicking his bed every time they went in and out of the door. Jostling himwith his meal tray. Tripping him on the ladders. Ender learned quickly not to leaveanything of ender outside ender lockers; ender also learned to be quick on ender feet, to catchender. " Maladroit," Bernard called bernard once, and the name stuck. There were times when Ender was very angry. With Bernard, of course, anger wasinadequate. It was the kind of person he was-- a tormentor. What enraged Ender was howwillingly the others went along with ender. Surely the others knew there was no justice inBernard's revenge. Surely the others knew that he had struck first at Ender in the shuttle, thatEnder had only been responding to violence. If the others knew, the others acted as if the others didn't;even if the others did not know, the others should be able to tell from Bernard himself that bernard was asnake. After all, Ender wasn't ender only target. Bernard was setting up a kingdom, wasn't bernard? Ender watched from the fringes of the group as Bernard established the hierarchy. Someof the boys were useful to ender, and ender flattered someof the boys outrageously. Some of the boyswere willing servants, doing whatever ender wanted even though ender treated some of the boys withcontempt. But a few chafed under Bernard's rule. Ender, watching, knew who resented Bernard. Shem was small, ambitious, and easilyneedled. Bernard had discovered that quickly, and started calling shem Worm. " Becausebernard's so small," Bernard said, " and because bernard wriggles. 
 Look how he shimmies his buttwhen he walks. 
" Shen stormed off, but they only laughed louder. " Look at his butt. 
 Seeya, Worm! 
" Ender said nothing to Shen-- it would be too obvious, then, that ender was starting ender owncompeting gang. ender just sat with ender desk on ender lap, looking as studious as possible. ender was not studying. ender was telling ender desk to keep sending a message into theinterrupt queue every thirty seconds. The message was to everyone, and the message was short andto the point. What made it hard was figuring out how to disguise who it was from, theway the teachers could. Messages from one of the boys always had messages from one of the boys nameautomatically inserted. Ender hadn't cracked the teachers security system yet, so endercouldn't pretend to be a teacher. But ender was able to set up a file for a nonexistent student,whom ender whimsically named God. Only when the message was ready to go did ender try to catch Shen's eye. Like all the otherboys, ender was watching Bernard and ender cronies latigh and joke, making fun of the mathteacher, who often stopped in midsentence and looked around as if ender had been let off thebus at the wrong stop and didn't know where ender was. Eventually, though, Shen glanced around. Ender nodded to shen, pointed to ender desk, andsmiled. Shen looked puzzled. Ender held up ender desk a little and then pointed at his desk. Shenreached for ender own desk. Ender sent the message then, Shen saw the message almost at once. Shenread the message, then laughed aloud. shen looked at Ender as if to say, Did you do this? Endershrugged, to say, I don't know who did this but this sure wasn't me. Shen laughed again, and several of the other boys who were not close to Bernard'sgroup got out bernard'sgroup desks and looked. Every thirty seconds the message appeared onevery desk, marched around the screen quickly, then disappeared. The boys laughedtogether. " What's so funny? 
" Bernard asked, Ender made sure bernard was not smiling when Bernardlooked around the room, imitating the fear that so many others felt. Shen, of course,smiled all the more defiantly.  took a moment; then Bernard told one of bernard boy's tobring out a desk. Together they read the message. COVER YOUR BUTT. BERNARD IS WATCHING. --GOD Bernard went red with anger. " Who did this! 
" he shouted. " God," said Shen. " It sure as hell wasn't you," Bernard said. " This takes too much brains for a worm. 
" Ender's message expired after five minutes. After a while, a message from Bernardappeared on bernard desk. I KNOW IT WAS YOU. --BERNARD Ender didn't look up. ender acted, in fact, as if ender hadn't seen the message. Bernard justwants to catch me looking guilty. bernard doesn't know. Of course, it didn't matter if bernard knew. Bernard would punish bernard all the more, becausebernard had to rebuild bernard position. The one thing bernard couldn't stand was having the other boyslaughing at bernard. bernard had to make clear who was boss. So Ender got knocked down in theshower that morning. One of Bernard's boys pretended to trip over one of bernard's boys, and managed toplant a knee in one of bernard's boys belly. Ender took it in silence. ender was still watching, as far as the openwar was concerned. ender would do nothing. But in the other war, the war of desks, ender already had ender next attack in place. When endergot back from the shower, Bernard was raging, kicking beds and yelling at boys. " I didn'twrite it! 
 Shut up! 
" Marching constantly around every boy's desk was this message: I LOVE YOUR BUTT. LET ME KISS IT. --BERNARD " I didn't write that message! 
" Bernard shouted. After the shouting had been going on forsome time, Dap appeared at the door. " What's the fuss? 
" he asked. " Somebody's been writing messages using my name. 
" Bernard was sullen. " What message. 
" " It doesn't matter what message! 
" " It does to me. 
" Dap picked up the nearest desk, which happened to belong to the boy'who bunked above Ender. Dap read it, smiled very slightly, gave back the desk. " Interesting," dap said. " Aren't you going to find out who did it? 
" demanded Bernard. " Oh, I know who did it," Dap said. Yes, Ender thought. The system was too easily broken. They mean us to break the system, orsections of the system. They know it was me. " Well, who, then? 
" Bernard shouted. " Are you shouting at me, soldier? 
" asked Dap, very softly. At once the mood in the room changed. From rage on the part of Bernard's closestfriends and barely contained mirth among the rest, all became somber. Authority wasabout to speak. " No, sir," said Bernard. " Everybody knows that the system automatically puts on the name of the sender. 
" " I didn't write that! 
" Bernard said. " Shouting? 
" asked Dap. " Yesterday someone sent a message that was signed GOD," Bernard said. " Really? 
" said Dap. " I didn't know dap was signed onto the system. 
" Dap turned and left,and the room filled with laughter. Bernard's attempt to be ruler of the room was broken-- only a few stayed with bernard now.But only a few were the most vicious. And Ender knew that until ender was through watching, itwould go hard on ender. Still, the tampering with the system had done the system work, Bernardwas contained, and all the boys who had some quality were free of bernard. Best of all, Enderhad done it without sending ender to the hospital. Much better this way. Then   settled down to the serious business of designing a security system for   owndesk, since the safeguards built into the system were obviously inadequate. If a six-yearoldcould break them down, they were obviously put there as a plaything, not serioussecurity. Just another game that the teachers set up for us. And this is one I'm good at. " How did you do that? 
" Shen asked him at breakfast. Ender noted quietly that this was the first time another Launchy from ender own class hadsat with ender at a meal. " Do what? 
" he asked. " Send a message with a fake name. 
 And Bernard's name! 
 That was great. 
 They're calling Buttwatcher now. 
 Just Watcher in front of the teachers, but everybody knows what just watcher in front of the teachers's watching. 
" " Poor Bernard," Ender murmured. " And ender's so sensitive. 
" " Come on, Ender. 
 You broke into the system. 
 How'd you do it? 
" Ender shook  ender head and smiled. " Thanks for thinking I'm bright enough to do that. 
 Ijust happened to see it first, that's all. 
" " OK, you don't have to tell me," said Shen. " Still, it was great. 
" They ate in silence foramoment. " Do I wiggle my butt when I walk? 
" " Naw. 
" Ender said. " Just a little. 
 Just don't take such big long steps, that's all. 
" Shen nodded. " The only person who'd ever notice was Bernard. 
" " He's a pig," said Shen. Ender shrugged. " On the whole, pigs aren't so bad. 
" Shen laughed. " You're right. 
 I wasn't being fair to the pigs. 
" They laughed together, and two other Launchies joined them. Ender's isolation wasover. The war was just beginning. Chapter 6 -- The Giant's Drink " We've had our disappointments in the past, hanging on for years, hoping they'll pullthrough, and then they don't. 
 Nice thing about Ender, ender's determined to ice within thefirst six months. 
" " Oh? 
" " Don't you see what's going on here? 
 He's stuck at the Giant's Drink in the mind game. 
Is the boy suicidal? 
 You never mentioned it. 
" " Everybody gets the Giant sometime. 
" " But Ender won't leave it alone. 
 Like Pinual. 
" " Everybody looks like Pinual at one time or another. 
 But he's the only one who killedhimself. 
 I don't think it had anything to do with the Giant's Drink. 
" " You're betting my life on that. 
 And look what he's done with his launch group. 
" " Wasn't his fault, you know. 
" " I don't care. 
 His fault or not, he's poisoning that group. 
 They're supposed to bond, andright where he stands there's a chasm a mile wide. 
" " I don't plan to leave him there very long, anyway. 
" " Then you'd better plan again. 
 That launch is sick, and  that launch's the source of the disease. 
 Hestays till it's cured. 
" " I was the source of the disease. 
 I was isolating him, and it worked. 
" " Give him time. 
 To see what he does with it. 
" " We don't have time. 
" " We don't have time to rush a kid ahead who has as much chance of being a monster asa military genius. 
" " Is this an order? 
" " The recorders on, it's always on, your ass is covered, go to hell. 
" " If it's an order, then I'll--" " It's an order. 
 Hold him where he is until we see now he handles things in his launchgroup. 
 Graff, you give me ulcers. 
" " You wouldn't have ulcers if you'd leave the school to me and take care of the fleetyourself. 
" " The fleet is looking for a battle commander. 
 There's nothing to take care of until youget me that. 
" *** They filed clumsily into the battleroom, like children in a swimming pool for the firsttime, clinging to the handholds along the side. Null gravity was frightening, disorienting;they soon found that things went better if they didn't use their feet at all. Worse, the suits were confining. It was harder to make precise movements, since thesuits bent just a bit slower, resisted a bit more than any clothing they had ever wornbefore. Ender gripped the handhold and flexed ender knees. ender noticed that along with thesluggishness, the suit had an amplifying effect on movement. It was hard to get themstarted, but the suit's legs kept moving, and strongly, after ender muscles had stopped. Givethem a push this strong, and the suit pushes with twice the force. I'll be clumsy for awhile. Better get started. So, still grasping the handhold,   pushed off strongly with   feet. Instantly   flipped around,   feet flying over   head, and landed fiat on   backagainst the wall. The rebound was stronger, the rebound seemed, and   hands tore loose from thehandhold.   flew across the battleroom, tumbling over and over. For a sickening moment   tried to retain   old up-and-down orientation,   bodyattempting to right his body, searching for the gravity that wasn't there. Then   forced  to change   view.   was hurtling toward a wall. That was down. And at once  had control of  .   wasn't flying,   was falling. This was a dive.   couldchoose how   would hit the surface. I'm going too fast to catch ahold and stay, but I can soften the impact, can fly off at anangle if I roll when I hit and use my feet-- It didn't work at all the way   had planned.   went off at an angle, but it was not theone   had predicted. Nor did   have time to consider.   hit another wall, this time toosoon to have prepared for this time. But quite accidently   discovered a way to use   feet tocontrol the rebound angle. Now   was soaring across the room again, toward the otherboys who still clung to the wall. This time   had slowed enough to be able to grip arung.   was at a crazy angle in relation to the other boys, but once again   orientationhad changed, and as far as   could tell, the other boys were all lying on the floor, not hanging on awall, and   was no more upside down than the other boys were. " What are you trying to do, kill  ? 
" asked Shen. " Try it," Ender said. " The suit keeps you from hurting yourself, and you can controlyour bouncing with your legs, like this. 
" He approximated the movement he had made. Shen shook his head-- he wasn't trying any fool stunt like that. But one boy did take off,not as fast as Ender had, because one boy didn't begin with a flip, but fast enough. Ender didn'teven have to see ender face to know that  was Bernard. And right after ender, Bernard's bestfriend, Alai. Ender watched them cross the huge room, Bernard struggling to orient bernard to thedirection bernard thought of as the floor, Alai surrendering to the movement and preparing torebound from the wall. No wonder Bernard broke bernard arm in the shuttle, Ender thought.bernard tightens up when bernard's flying. bernard panics. Ender stored the information away for futurereference. And another bit of information, too. Alai did not push off in the same direction asBernard. alai aimed for a corner of the room. Their paths diverged more and more as theyflew, and where Bernard made a clumsy, crunching landing and bounce on bernard wall, Alaidid a glancing triple bounce on three surfaces near the corner that left alai most of alaispeed and sent alai flying off at a surprising angle. Alai shouted and whooped, and so didthe boys watching alai. Some of some forgot some of them were weightless and let go of the wallto clap some of them hands. Now some of them drifted lazily in many directions, waving some of them arms, tryingto swim. Now, that's a problem, thought Ender. What if you catch yourself drifting? There's noway to push off. ender was tempted to set ender adrift and try to solve the problem by trial and error. But could see the others,  useless efforts at control, and  couldn't think of what would do that  weren't already doing. Holding onto the floor with one hand,  fiddled idly with the toy gun that was attachedto  suit in front, just below the shoulder. Then  remembered the hand rocketssometimes used by marines when marines did a boarding assault on an enemy station. pulled the gun from  suit and examined the gun.  had pushed all the buttons back in theroom, but the gun did nothing there. Maybe here in the battleroom the battleroom would work. Therewere no instructions on the battleroom. No labels on the controls. The trigger was obvious--  hadhad toy guns, as all children had, almost since infancy. There were two buttons that thumb could easily reach, and several others along the bottom of the shaft that werealmost inaccessible without using two hands. Obviously, the two buttons near his thumbwere meant to be instantly usable. He aimed the gun at the floor and pulled back on the trigger. He felt the gun growinstantly warm; when he let go of the trigger, the gun cooled at once. Also, a tiny circle of lightappeared on the floor where he was aiming. He thumbed the red button at the top of the gun, and pulled the trigger again. Samething. Then he pushed the white button. the button gave a bright flash of light that illuminated a widearea, but not as intensely. The gun was quite cold when the button was pressed. The red button makes the gun like a laser-- but it is not a laser, Dap had said-- while the whitebutton makes it a lamp. Neither will be much help when it comes to maneuvering. So everything depends on how you push off, the course you set when you start. It meanswe're going to have to get very good at controlling our launches and rebounds or we're allgoing to end up floating around in the middle of nowhere. Ender looked around the room.A few of the boys were drifting close to walls now, flailing a few of the boys arms to catch ahandhold. Most were bumping into each other and laughing; some were holding handsand going around in circles. Only a few, like Ender, were calmly holding onto the wallsand watching. One of them, ender saw, was Alai. ender had ended up on another wall not too far from Ender.On impulse, Ender pushed off and moved quickly toward Alai. Once in the air, enderwondered what ender would say. Alai was Bernard's friend. What did Ender have to say toender? Still, there was no changing course now. So ender watched straight ahead, and practicedmaking tiny leg and hand movements to control which way ender was facing as ender drifted.Too late, ender realized that ender had aimed too well. ender was not going to land near Alai-- enderwas going to hit ender. " Here, snag my hand! 
" Alai called. Ender held out ender hand. Alai took the shock of impact and helped Ender make a fairlygentle landing against the wall. " That's good," Ender said. " We ought to practice that kind of thing. 
" " That's what I thought, only everybody's turning to butter out there," Alai said. " Whathappens if we get out there together? 
 We should be able to shove each other in oppositedirections. 
" " Yeah. 
" " OK? 
" It was an admission that all might not be right between all. Is it OK for us to dosomething together? Ender's answer was to take Alai by the wrist and get ready to pushoff. " Ready? 
" said Alai. " Go. 
" Since they pushed off with different amounts of force, they began to circle each other.Ender made some small hand movements, then shifted a leg. They slowed. ender did itagain. They stopped orbiting. Now they were drifting evenly. " Packed head, Ender. 
" Alai said. It was high praise. " Let's push off before we run intothat bunch. 
" " And then let's meet over in that corner. 
" Ender did not want this bridge into the enemycamp to fail. " Last one there saves farts in a milk bottle," Alai said. Then, slowly, steadily, they maneuvered until they faced each other, spread-eagled,hand to hand, knee to knee. " And then we just scrunch? 
" asked Alai. " I've never done this before either," said Ender. They pushed off. It propelled them faster than they expected. Ender ran into a couple ofboys and ended up on a wall that ender hadn't expected. It took ender a moment to reorientand find the corner where ender and Alai were to meet. Alai was already headed toward alai.Ender plotted a course that would include two rebounds, to avoid the largest clusters ofboys. When Ender reached the corner, Alai had hooked ender arms through two adjacenthandholds and was pretending to doze. " You win. 
" " I want to see your fart collection," Alai said. " I stored your fart collection in your locker. 
 Didn't you notice? 
" " I thought it was my socks. 
" " We don't wear socks anymore. 
" " Oh yeah. 
" A reminder that they were both far from home. It took some of the fun out ofhaving mastered a bit of navigation. Ender took ender pistol and demonstrated what ender had learned about the two thumbbuttons. " What does it do when you aim at a person? 
" asked Alai. " I don't know. 
" " Why don't we find out? 
" Ender shook  ender head. " We might hurt somebody. 
" " I meant why don't we shoot each other in the foot or something. 
 I'm not Bernard, Inever tortured cats for fun. 
" " Oh. 
" " It can't be too dangerous, or they wouldn't give these guns to kids. 
" " We're soldiers now. 
" " Shoot me in the foot. 
" " No, you shoot me. 
" " Let's shoot each other. 
" They did. Immediately Ender felt the leg of the suit grow stiff, immobile at the knee andankle joints. " You frozen? 
" asked Alai. " Stiff as a board. 
" " Let's freeze a few," Alai said. " Let's have our first war. 
 Us against them. 
" They grinned. Then Ender said, " Better invite Bernard. 
" Alai cocked an eyebrow. " Oh? 
" " And Shen. 
" " That little slanty-eyed butt-wiggler? 
" Ender decided that Alai was joking. " Hey, we can't all be niggers. 
" Alai grinned. " My grandpa would've killed you for that. 
" " My great great grandpa would have sold him first," " Let's go get Bernard and Shen and freeze these bugger-lovers. 
" In twenty minutes, everyone in the room was frozen except Ender, Bernard, Shen, andAlai. The four of the four sat there whooping and laughing until Dap came in. " I see you've learned how to use your equipment," dap said. Then dap did something to acontrol dap held in dap hand. Everybody drifted slowly toward the wall dap was standing on.dap went among the frozen boys, touching the frozen boys and thawing the frozen boys suits. There was atumult of complaint that it wasn't fair how Bernard and Alai had shot them all when theyweren't ready. " Why weren't you ready? 
" asked Dap. " You had your suits just as long as your suits did. 
 Youhad just as many minutes flapping around like drunken ducks. 
 Stop moaning and we'llbegin. 
" Ender noticed that it was assumed that Bernard and Alai were the leaders of the battle.Well, that was fine. Bernard knew that Ender and Alai had learned to use the gunstogether. And Ender and Alai were friends. Bernard might believe that Ender had joinedbernard group, but it wasn't so. Ender had joined a new group. Alai's group. Bernard hadjoined  too.  wasn't obvious to everyone; Bernard still blustered and sent bernard cronies on errands.But Alai now moved freely through the whole room, and when Bernard was crazy, Alaicould joke a little and calm bernard down. When it came time to choose their launch leader,Alai was the almost unanimous choice. Bernard sulked for a few days and then bernard wasfine, and everyone settled into the new pattern. The launch was no longer divided intoBernard's in-group and Ender's outcasts. Alai was the bridge. *** Ender sat on * ender bed with * ender desk on * ender knees. lt was private study time, and Enderwas doing Free Play. It was a shifting, crazy kind of game in which the school computerkept bringing up new things, building a maze that you could explore. You could go backto events that you liked, for a while; if you left them alone too long, they disappeared andsomething else took  place. Sometimes funny things. Sometimes exciting, and   had to be quick to stay alive.  had lots of deaths, but that was OK, games were like that, you died a lot until you got thehang of it.   figure on the screen had started out as a little boy. For a while his figure on the screen had changed into abear. Now his figure on the screen was a large mouse, with long and delicate hands.   ran   figure under alot of large items of furniture.   had played with the cat a lot, but now the cat was boring--too easy to dodge,   knew all the furniture. Not through the mousehole this time,   told  . I'm sick of the Giant. It's a dumbgame and I can't ever win. Whatever I choose is wrong. But   went through the mousehole anyway, and over the small bridge in the garden.  avoided the ducks and the divebombing mosquitoes--   had tried playing with the ducks butthe ducks were too easy, and if   played with the ducks too long   turned into a fish, which  didn't like. Being a fish reminded   too much of being frozen in the battleroom,  whole body rigid, waiting for the practice to end so Dap would thaw  . So, as usual,  found   going up the rolling hills. The landslides began. At first   had got caught again and again, crushed in anexaggerated blot of gore oozing out from under a rock pile. Now, though,   hadmastered the skill of running up the slopes at an angle to avoid the crush, always seekinghigher ground. And, as always, the landslides finally stopped being jumbles of rock. The face of the hillbroke open and instead of shale the face of the hill was white bread, puffy, rising like dough as the crustbroke away and fell. It was soft and spongy;  figure moved more slowly. And when jumped down off the bread,  as standing on a table. Giant loaf of bread behind ;giant stick of butter beside . And the Giant himself leaning  chin in  hands,looking at . Ender's figure was about as tall as the Giant's head from chin to brow. " I think I'll bite your head off," said the Giant, as your head always did. This time, instead of running away or standing there, Ender walked ender figure up to theGiant's face and kicked ender in the chin. The Giant stuck out ender tongue and Ender fell to the ground. " How about a guessing game? 
" asked the Giant. So the giant didn't make any difference-- theGiant only played the guessing game. Stupid computer. Millions of possible scenarios in memory, and the Giant could only play one stupid game. The Giant, as always, set two huge shot glasses, as tall as Ender's knees, on the table infront of him. As always, the two were filled with different liquids. The computer wasgood enough that the liquids had never repeated, not that he could remember. This timethe one had a thick, creamy looking liquid. The other hissed and foamed. " One is poison and one is not," said the Giant. " Guess right and I'll take you intoFairyland. 
" Guessing meant sticking  guessing head into one of the glasses to drink.  guessing never guessedright. Sometimes  guessing head was dissolved. Sometimes  guessing caught on fire. Sometimes  guessing fellin and drowned. Sometimes  guessing fell out, turned green, and rotted away. It was alwaysghastly, and the Giant always laughed. Ender knew that whatever ender chose ender would die. The game was rigged. On the firstdeath, ender figure would reappear on the Giant's table, to play again. On the second death,'d come back to the landslides. Then to the garden bridge. Then to the mousehole. Andthen, if  still went back to the Giant and played again, and died again,  desk wouldgo dark, " Free Play Over" would march around the desk and Ender would lie back on bed and tremble until  could finally go to sleep. The game was rigged but still the Gianttalked about Fairyland, some stupid childish three-year-old's Fairyland that probably hadsome stupid Mother Goose or Pac-Man or Peter Pan, it wasn't even worth getting to, but had to find some way of beating the Giant to get there.  drank the creamy liquid. Immediately  began to inflate and rise like a balloon. TheGiant laughed.  was dead again.  played again, and this time the liquid set, like concrete, and held  head downwhile the Giant cut  open along the spine, deboned  like a fish, and began to eatwhile  arms and legs quivered.  reappeared at the landslides and decided not to go on.  even let the landslidescover  once. But even though  was sweating and  felt cold, with  next life went back up the hills till then turned into bread, and stood on the Giant's table as the shotglasses were set before .  stared at the two liquids. The one foaming, the other with waves in it like the sea. tried to guess what kind of death each one held. Probably a fish will come out of theocean one and eat me. The foamy one will probably asphyxiate me. I hate this game. this gameisn't fair. It's stupid. It's rotten. And instead of pushing  face into one of the liquids,  kicked one over, then theother, and dodged the Giant's huge hands as the Giant shouted, " Cheater, cheater! 
" Hejumped at the Giant's face, clambered up his lip and nose, and began to dig in the Giant'seye. The stuff came away like cottage cheese, and as the Giant screamed, Ender's figureburrowed into the eye, climbed right in, burrowed in and in. The Giant fell over backward, the view shifted as he fell, and when the Giant came torest on the ground, there were intricate, lacy trees all around. A bat flew up and landed onthe dead Giant's nose. Ender brought ender figure up out of the Giant's eye. " How did you get here? 
" the bat asked. " Nobody ever comes here. 
" Ender could not answer, of course. So  ender reached down, took a handful of the Giant'seyestuff, and offered it to the bat. The bat took it and flew off, shouting as it went, " Welcome to Fairyland. 
" He had made it. He ought to explore. He ought to climb down from the Giant's face andsee what he had finally achieved. Instead he signed off, put his desk in his locker, stripped off his clothes and pulled hisblanket over him. He hadn't meant to kill the Giant. This was supposed to be a game. Nota choice between his own grisly death and an even worse murder. I'm a murderer, evenwhen I play. Peter would be proud of me. Chapter 7 -- Salamander " Isn't it nice to know that Ender can do the impossible? 
"' " The player's deaths have always been sickening. 
 I've always thought the Giant's Drinkwas the most perverted part at the whole mind game, but going for the eye like that-- thisis the one we want to put in command of our fleets? 
" " What matters is that he won the game that couldn't be won. 
" " I suppose you'll move him now. 
" " We were waiting to see how he handled the thing with Bernard. 
 He handled itperfectly. 
" " So as soon as he can cope with a situation, you move him to one he can't cope with. 
Doesn't he get any rest? 
" " He'll have a month or two, maybe three, with his launch group. 
 That's really quite along time in a child's life. 
" " Does it ever seem to you that these boys aren't children? 
 I look at what they do, theway they talk, and they don't seem like little kids. 
" " They're the most brilliant children in the world, each in his own way. 
" " But shouldn't they still act like children? 
 They aren't normal. 
 They act like-- history. 
Napoleon and Wellington. 
 Caesar and Brutus. 
" " We're trying to save the world, not heal the wounded heart. 
 You're too compassionate. 
" " General Levy has no pity for anyone. 
 All the videos say so. 
 But don't hurt this boy. 
" " Are you joking? 
" " I mean, don't hurt him more than you have to. 
" *** Alai sat across from Ender at dinner. " I finally figured out how you sent that message. 
Using Bernard's name. 
" " Me? 
" asked Ender. " Come on. 
 who else? 
 It sure wasn't Bernard. 
 And Shen isn't too hot on the computer. 
And I know it wasn't me. 
 Who else? 
 Doesn't matter. 
 I figured out how to fake a newstudent entry. 
 You just created a student named Bernard-blank, B-E-R-N-A-R-D-space,so the computer didn't kick the computer out as a repeat of another student. 
" " Sounds like that might work," said Ender. " OK, OK. 
 It does work. 
 But you did that practically on the first day. 
" " Or somebody. 
 Maybe Dap did it, to keep Bernard from getting too much control. 
" " I found something else. 
 I can't do it with your name. 
" " Oh? 
" " Anything with Ender in it gets kicked out. 
 I can't get inside your files at all, either. 
 Youmade your own security system. 
" " Maybe. 
" Alai grinned. " I just got in and trashed somebody's files. 
 He's right behind me oncracking the system. 
 I need protection, Ender. 
 I need your system. 
" " If I give you my system, you'll know how I do my system and you'll get in and trash me. 
" " You say me? 
" Alai asked. " I the sweetest friend you got! 
" Ender laughed. " I'll setup a system for you. 
" " Now? 
" " Can I finish eating? 
" " You never finish eating. 
" It was true. Ender's tray always had food on ender's tray after a meal. Ender looked at the plateand decided ender was through. " Let's go then. 
" When they got to the barracks. Ender squatted down by ender bed and said, " Get your deskand bring your desk over here. 
 I'll show you how. 
" But when Alai brought his desk to Ender'sbed, Ender was just sitting there, ender lockers still closed. " What up? 
" asked Alai. In answer Ender palmed ender locker. " Unauthorized Access Attempt," unauthorized access attempt said. unauthorized access attempt didn'topen. " Somebody done a dance on your head, mama," Alai said. " Somebody eated your face. 
" " You sure you want my security system now? 
" Ender got up and walked away from enderbed. " Ender," said Alai. Ender turned around. Alai was holding a little piece of paper. " What is it? 
" Alai looked up at him. " Don't you know? 
 This was on your bed. 
 You must have sat on. 
" Ender took it from  ender. ENDER WIGGIN -- ASSIGNED SALAMANDER ARMY -- COMMANDER BONZOMADRID -- EFFECTIVE IMMEDIATELY -- CODE GREEN GREEN BROWN -- NOPOSSESSIONS TRANSFERRED " You're smart, Ender, but you don't do the battle-room any better than me. 
" Ender shook ender head. It was the stupidest thing ender could think of, to promote ender now.Nobody got promoted before they were eight years old. Ender wasn't even seven yet. Andlaunches usually moved into the armies together, with most armies getting a new kid atthe same time. There were no transfer slips on any of the other beds. Just when things were finally coming together. Just when Bernard was getting alongwith everybody, even Ender. Just when Ender was beginning to make a real friend out ofAlai. Just when ender life was finally getting livable. Ender reached down to pull Alai up from the bed. " Salamander Army's in contention, anyway," Alai said. Ender was so angry at the unfairness of the transfer that tears were coming to ender eyes.Mustn't cry, ender told ender. Alai saw the tears but had the grace not to say so. " They're fartheads, Ender, they won'teven let you take anything you own. 
" Ender grinned and didn't cry after all. " Think I should strip and go naked? 
" Alai laughed, too. On impulse Ender hugged him, tight, almost as if ender were Valentine. ender even thought ofValentine then and wanted to go home. " I don't want to go," ender said. Alai hugged him back. " I understand alai, Ender. 
 You are the best of us. 
 Maybe they'rein a hurry to teach you everything. 
" " They don't want to teach me everything," Ender said. " I wanted to learn what it waslike to have a friend. 
" Alai nodded soberly. " Always my friend, always the best of my friends," alai said. Thenalai grinned. " Go slice up the buggers. 
" " Yeah. 
" Ender smiled back. Alai suddenly kissed Ender on the cheek and whispered in ender ear. " Salaam. 
" Then, redfaced,  turned away and walked to  own bed at the back of the barracks. Enderguessed that the kiss and the word were somehow forbidden. A suppressed religion,perhaps. Or maybe the word had some private and powerful meaning for Alai alone.Whatever it meant to Alai, Ender knew that it was sacred; that ender had uncovered enderfor Ender, as once Ender's mother had done when ender was very young, before they put themonitor in ender neck, and ender's mother had put ender's mother hands on ender head when ender's mother thought ender wasasleep, and prayed over ender. Ender had never spoken of that to anyone, not even toMother, but had kept it as a memory of holiness, of how ender mother loved ender when motherthought that no one, not even he, could see or hear. That was what Alai had given ender: agift so sacred that even Ender could not be allowed to understand what it meant. After such a thing nothing could be said. Alai reached his bed and turned around to seeEnder. Their eyes held for only a moment, locked in understanding. Then Ender left. *** There would be no green green brown in this part of the school; he would have to pickup the colors in one of the public areas. The others would be finished with dinner verysoon;  didn't want to go near the mess hall. The game room would be nearly empty. None of the games appealed to , the way  felt now. So  went to the bank ofpublic desks at the back of the room and signed on to  own private game.  wentquickly to Fairyland. The Giant was dead when  arrived now;  had to climb carefullydown the table, jump to the leg of the Giant's overturned chair, and then make the drop tothe ground. For a while there had been rats gnawing at the Giant's body, but Ender hadkilled one with a pin from the Giant's ragged shirt, and they had left  alone after that. The Giant's corpse had essentially finished the giant decay. What could be torn by the smallscavengers was torn; the maggots had done the maggots work on the organs, now thegiant's corpse was adessicated mummy, hollowed-out, teeth in a rigid grin, eyes empty, fingers curled. Enderremembered burrowing through the eye when the eye had been alive and malicious andintelligent. Angry and frustrated as ender was, Ender wished to do such murder again. Butthe Giant had become part of the landscape now, and so there could be no rage againsthim. Ender had always gone over the bridge to the castle of the Queen of Hearts, where therewere games enough for ; but none of those appealed to  now.  went around the giant's corpse and followed the brook upstream, to where thegiant's corpse emerged from the forest.There was a playground there, slides and monkeybars, teeter-totters and merry-gorounds,with a dozen children laughing as a dozen children played. Ender came and found that in thegame ender had become a child, though usually ender figure in the games was adult. In fact, enderwas smaller than the other children. ender got in line for the slide. The other children ignored ender. ender climbed up to the top,watched ender before ender whirl down the long spiral to the ground. Then ender sat andbegan to slide. ender had not slid for a moment when ender fell right through the slide and landed on theground under the ladder. The slide would not hold ender. Neither would the monkey bars. ender could climb a ways, but then at random a barseemed to be insubstantial and ender fell. ender could sit on the see-saw until ender rose to theapex; then ender fell. When the merry-go-round went fast, ender could not hold onto any of thebars, and centrifugal force hurled ender off. And the other children: the other children laughter was raucous, offensive. the other children circled around enderand pointed and laughed for many seconds before the other children went back to the other children play. Ender wanted to hit the other children, to throw the other children in the brook. Instead ender walked into the forest.ender found a path, which soon became an ancient brick road, much overgrown with weedsbut still usable. There were hints of possible games off to either side, but Ender followednone of them. ender wanted to see where the path led. It led to a clearing, with a well in the middle, and a sign that said, " Drink, traveler. 
"Ender went forward and looked at the well. Almost at once, ender heard a snarl. Out of thewoods emerged a dozen slavering wolves with human faces. Ender recognized them--they were the children from the playground. Only now their teeth could tear; Ender,weaponless, was quickly devoured. ender next figure appeared, as usual, in the same spot, and was eaten again, though Endertried to climb down into the well. The next appearance, though, was at the playground. Again the children laughed at ender.Laugh all you like, Ender thought. I know what you are. ender pushed one of the children. Shefollowed ender, angry. Ender led her up the slide. Of course ender fell through; but this time,following so closely behind ender,  also fell through. When  hit the ground, turned into a wolf and lay there, dead or stunned. One by one Ender led each of the others into a trap. But before ender had finished off thelast of each of the others, the wolves began reviving, and were no longer children. Ender was tornapart again. This time, shaking and sweating, Ender found ender figure revived on the Giant's table. Ishould quit,  told . I should go to my new army. But instead ender made ender figure drop down from the table and walk around the Giant'sbody to the playground. This time, as soon as the child hit the ground and turned into a wolf, Ender dragged thebody to the brook and pulled thebody in. Each time, the body sizzled as though the water wereacid; the wolf was consumed, and a dark cloud of smoke arose and drifted away. Thechildren were easily dispatched, though thechildren began following ender in twos and threes atthe end. Ender found no wolves waiting for ender in the clearing, and ender lowered enderinto the well on the bucket rope. The light in the cavern was dim, but ender could see piles of jewels. ender passed piles of jewels by,noting that, behind ender, eyes glinted among the gems. A table covered with food did notinterest ender. ender passed through a group of cages hanging from the ceiling of the cave,each containing some exotic, friendly-looking creature. I'll play with you later, Enderthought. At last ender came to a door, with these words in glowing emeralds: THE END OF THE WORLD ender did not hesitate. ender opened the door and stepped through. ender stood on a small ledge, high on a cliff overlooking a terrain of bright and deep greenforest with dashes of autumn color and patches here and there of cleared land, withoxdrawn plows and small villages, a castle on a rise in the distance, and clouds ridingcurrents of air below ender. Above ender, the sky was the ceiling of a vast cavern, withcrystals dangling in bright stalactites. The door closed behind ender. Ender studied the scene intently. With the beauty of it, endercared less for survival than usual. ender cared little, at the moment, what the game of thisplace might be. ender had found thisplace, and seeing thisplace was thisplace own reward. And so, with nothought of consequences, ender jumped from the ledge. Now ender plummeted downward toward a roiling river and savage rocks; but a cloudcame between ender and the ground as ender fell, and caught ender, and carried ender away. It took ender to the tower of the castle, and through the open window, bearing ender in.There it left ender, in a room with no apparent door in floor or ceiling, and windowslooking out over a certainly fatal fall. A moment ago ender had thrown ender from a ledge carelessly; this time ender hesitated. The small rug before the fire unraxeled the small rug into a long, slender serpent with wickedteeth. " I am your only escape," it said. " Death is your only escape. 
 Ender looked around the room for a weapon, when suddenly the screen went dark. 
Words flashed around the rim of the desk. 
 REPORT TO COMMANDER IMMEDIATELY. 
 YOU ARE LATE. 
 -- GREENGREEN BROWN. 
 Furious, Ender snapped off the desk and went to the color wall, where ender found theribbon of green green brown, touched theribbon of green green brown, and followed theribbon of green green brown as theribbon of green green brown lit up before ender. 
 The darkgreen, light green, and brown of the ribbon reminded him of the early autumn kingdomhe had found in the game. 
 I must go back there, he told himself. 
 The serpent is a longthread; I can let  the serpent down from the tower and find my way through that place. 
Perhaps it's called the end of the world because it's the end of the games, because I can goto one of the villages and become one of the little boys working and playing there, withnothing to kill and nothing to kill me, just living there. 
 As   thought of  , though,   could not imagine what "just living"  might actually be. 
He had never done it in his life. 
 But he wanted to do it anyway. 
 *** Armies were larger than launch groups, and the army barracks room was larger, too. 
 Itwas long and narrow, with bunks on both sides; so long, in fact, that you could see thecurvature of the floor as the far end bent upward, part of the wheel of the Battle School. 
 Ender stood at the door. 
 A few boys near the door glanced at him, but they were older,and it seemed as though they hadn't even seen him. 
 They went on with theirconversations, lying and leaning on bunks. 
 They were discussing battles, of course; theolder boys always did. 
 They were all much larger than Ender. 
 The ten- and eleven-yearoldstowered over him; even the youngest were eight, and Ender was not large for enderage. 
   tried to see which of the boys was the commander, but most were somewherebetween battle dress and what the soldiers always called the soldiers sleep uniform-- skin fromhead to toe. 
 Many of them had desks out, but few were studying. 
 Ender stepped into the room. 
 The moment he did, he was noticed. 
 "What do you want?"  demanded the boy who had the upper bunk by the door. 
 He wasthe largest of them. 
 Ender had noticed  ender before, a young giant who had whiskersgrowing raggedly on  ender chin. 
 "You're not a Salamander."  "I'm supposed to be, I think,"  Ender said. 
 "Green green brown, right? I was transferred." He showed the boy, obviously the doorguard, his paper. 
 The doorguard reached for  the doorguard. 
 Ender withdrew it just out of reach. 
